
 Philip Davies had complained to the Equality and Human Rights Commission that the Jhalak prize breached discrimination rules A Conservative MP who claimed that a book prize set up to address the lack of diversity in British publishing was discriminatory against white people has had his complaint dismissed. Philip Davies, Conservative MP for Shipley, wrote to the Equality and Human Rights Commission in January, claiming that the Jhalak prize for writers of colour discriminated against white writers. 

 Valuable insights into the troubled author’s life emerge from his meticulous scrapbooks of reviews, photographs, letters and ephemera, writes his editor In June 2015, the trustees of the Fitzgerald estate invited me to edit a collection of F Scott Fitzgerald ’s last unpublished short stories. Scribner, his publisher for his whole career, would be bringing out the book. Since 1994, when I was a graduate student at Princeton, I have worked often with the Fitzgerald papers at Firestone Library. Fitzgerald went to Princeton in 1913 and left in 1917 without graduating, going instead straight to officer training camp to prepare to serve in the first world war. The rare books and special collections division of the library, renamed in 1948 for Fitzgerald’s college friend Harvey S Firestone, class of 1920, received Fitzgerald’s papers as a gift from his daughter Scottie in 1950. His wife Zelda’s papers were later housed there too. It is one of the most extensive, and best preserved, collections of an American writer. 

These essays by a young American writer are wrongly advertised as reinventing masculinity but prove to be funny and disturbing In the first three pages of The Correspondence , a tightly written, often brilliant, occasionally exasperating collection of essays by the American writer JD Daniels, we are treated to a jockstrap, some football players, a gymnasium, pool playing, a toilet, a street fight, and the phrase “Big Tony knocked me down and sat on my neck.” Cigars, booze and drugs are soon to follow, along with a page-long list of books the author has read, a dig at “professional writers” and their penchant for pontificating, and a lament at having a piece spiked at the London Review of Books. These details come from “Letter from Cambridge”, an essay ostensibly about the author’s experiences training for, and competing in, Brazilian jiu-jitsu. It seems to satisfy the promise of the book’s PR and blurbs, which would have it reinventing masculinity or some such nonsense; and it doesn’t bode well for the rest, which I fully expected to hate. 

 Maylis de Kerangal, the French author and winner of the 2017 Wellcome prize for writing, on grief, heart surgery and surfing If there was ever a novel that offered a metaphor for its writer’s life,  Mend the Living  is it: it opens with a towering evocation of the surfing life and Maylis de Kerangal herself is on the crest of a wave. The French novelist was in London last weekend for a series of talks to celebrate the shortlist of this year’s Wellcome prize for writing that encompasses medicine, health or illness. After a dash back to Paris to be with her family for the results of the first round of the French election, she returned to London on Monday to discover that she had become only the second novelist to win the £30,000 award. Four days later a film adaptation of the novel was released, directed by Katell Quillévéré with a high profile cast headed by Tahar Rahim and Emmanuelle Seigner.  Mend the Living ( Heal the Living in the film version) is the story of a heart transplant, which cascades with the irresistible impetus of an Atlantic roller from the death of a teenager in a van accident as he returns with his friends from an early morning surfing session, to the implantation of his heart into a middle-aged woman. “From its glorious 300-word first sentence to the stately canopic imagery of its climactic scenes, Mend the Living mimics the rhythm of the processes it depicts – the troughs and peaks of grief and protocol, of skills utilised and acceptance finally achieved,” wrote Guardian reviewer M John Harrison. 

 The leftwing intellectual with rock-star popularity argues that Trump vs Clinton, and Brexit vs Remain are mere sideshows Life is, despite all the advances of medical science, still way too short to spend any time reading theoretical gibberish concocted by superannuated Marxists – theory that purports to&nbsp;still further stretch this ideological corpse like Procrustes on the rack of contemporary events. Fortunate Guardian-reading bourgeois liberals that we are, however, God – or the Self-Moving Absolute – has sent us Slavoj Žižek instead. Žižek demands to be taken seriously: he produces thousands of wildly and densely written pages that bear all the hallmarks of a&nbsp;scholar who has ingurgitated the western canon with the sole intent of firing it at the very bastions of power. A political gadfly, who ran for office in his native Slovenia, Žižek has at least leant on the barricades – if not, so far as we know, while actually mixing a Molotov cocktail – and believes in the idea of himself as a revolutionary activist sufficiently to subtitle his latest book Chronicles of a Year of Acting Dangerously , while quoting in its pages Gandhi ’s famous maxim: “Be the change that you wish to see in the world.” 

 Days after the former American football star killed himself in prison, the bestselling thriller writer announces plans for a nonfiction study of ‘what went wrong’ Barely a week after the American football star Aaron Hernandez killed himself in prison, where he was serving a life sentence for murder, the bestselling novelist James Patterson has announced he is writing a true-crime book about the case. Due for release in 2018, the creator of the Alex Cross thrillers said he would track the rise of the player from humble origins through a $40m (£30m) professional football career to his conviction for murder in 2015 and his death at 27. In a statement, Patterson’s US publisher Little, Brown said: “The nonfiction book will investigate the dramatic rise and fall of the football star, who left behind a murder sentence, a young daughter, and shocking secrets.” 

 Heavy reading increases empathy – and makes users of dating sites more likely to click on your profile A dating website claims to have discovered what kind of reading preferences make one more attractive to potential partners. According to eHarmony, women who listed  The Hunger Games  among their favourite books saw the biggest boost to their popularity, while men who read Richard Branson ’s business books were approached most often.  The Girl With the Dragon Tattoo  was a hit for both genders. But crucially, reading anything is a winning move; men who list reading on their dating profiles receive 19% more messages, and women 3% more. This welcome news does not come out of the blue. Last year, the dating app My Bae also announced that people who used reading tags on its profiles were more successful in finding dates. More recently, research from Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, showed that reading a novel can improve brain function. 

In a noir-tinged thriller, New York hipsters exploiting black music are haunted by the spirit of the blues The phonograph, Thomas Edison wrote in 1888, “knows more about us than we know ourselves. It retains the memory of many things which we forget, even though we have said them”. For the American inventor, who would later secretly fund the electric chair, phonography had the capacity to become an educational tool and to exert “a decidedly moral influence” on society. It is the potential of 78rpm discs to store repressed memories, as well as to bring them into a destabilised present, that Hari Kunzru explores in his fifth novel White Tears . Set in modern-day New York, a gentrifying retropolis where hirsute young men dress as “hobos and mountain men and Pony Express riders”, it tracks the relationship between two white arts college graduates. Seth is a self-proclaimed “weird kid” who had a troubled adolescence and is now a “sonic geologist” searching for the hidden sounds that lurk beneath the city’s honking streets, while Carter Wallace is the popular and cosmopolitan trust-fund son of a Bush-supporting Republican donor. For Carter the best music was made in the past and by black people. He’s obsessed with vintage gear, vinyl records, prewar blues. 

 On each page of A Universe Explodes by Tea Uglow, owners are required to add one word and remove two – which amounts to an odd reading experience It opens with a woman reaching up for a cereal bowl and closes with a new beginning – or at least it does for the moment. By the time you get to read it, my copy of A Universe Explodes will have changed. Tea Uglow’s story about a disintegrating life has been built to be literally deconstructed, with readers required to make small edits to the book’s text, as it passes from one owner to the next.  Related:  What apps next? Publishers and developers embrace 'unprintable' fiction  

 After the Scandi noir boom, dark tales from British authors are making waves abroad. Publishers, agents and authors take up the case When ex-paramedic Daniel Cole signed with agent Sue Armstrong, he was “delighted”. When Armstrong bagged him a six-figure, three-book deal from a British publisher he was “in shock”. But after a fierce fight between German publishers over his debut crime novel, Ragdoll, saw him signing for a record-breaking seven figures, Cole found himself among a group of British authors toppling Scandinavian writers from their perch at the summit of bestseller lists around the world. “I just couldn’t believe it,” he says. “I was delighted to get an agent after suffering loads of rejections, and then it just went crazy.” 

 Just a few years ago, the Kindle was being blamed for the death of the traditional book. But the latest figures show a dramatic reversal of fortunes, with sales of ebooks plunging. So what’s behind this resurgence? Here are some things that you can’t do with a Kindle. You can’t turn down a corner, tuck a flap in a chapter, crack a spine (brutal, but sometimes pleasurable) or flick the pages to see how far you have come and how far you have to go. You can’t remember something potent and find it again with reference to where it appeared on a right- or left-hand page. You often can’t remember much at all. You can’t tell whether the end is really the end, or whether the end equals 93% followed by 7% of index and/or questions for book clubs. You can’t pass it on to a friend or post it through your neighbour’s door. A few years ago, I was given a Kindle. I had become a student again. I was reading lots of books and I needed them cheap and light. But now the Kindle has slipped to the back of the desk drawer behind the Blu-Tack that comes out only at Christmas. Meanwhile, the stack of hardbacks and paperbacks on the bedside table has grown so tall it has spawned sub-stacks on the floor; when I get into bed at night, it is like looking down on a miniature book city. I don’t want to speculate about what goes on in other people’s bedrooms but I suspect it might be something similar, because figures published today by the Publishing Association show that sales of consumer ebooks have dropped by 17%, while sales of physical books are up 8%. Consumer spending on books was up £89m across the board last year, compared with 2015. So why is the physical book winning through? 

 Artist was creator of beloved characters such as Minnie the Minx and the Bash Street Kids Leo Baxendale, the creator of Beano favourites Minnie the Minx and the Bash Street Kids, has died at the age of 86. Baxendale’s fresh and energetic style, combined with his drawings of anarchic fun in strips including Little Plum, The Three Bears and Lord Snooty, made him a favourite for generations of British children, as well as an inspiration for comics artists. The comics historian Denis Gifford has called him “the most influential and most imitated comics artist of modern times” and he was inducted into the British Comic Awards Hall of Fame in 2013. Baxendale died from cancer on Tuesday. 

 Consumer sales down to £204m last year and are at lowest level since 2011 – when Amazon Kindle sales first took off in UK  Britons are abandoning the ebook at an alarming rate with sales of consumer titles down almost a fifth last year, as “screen fatigue” helped fuel a five-year high in printed book sales. Sales of consumer ebooks plunged 17% to £204m last year, the lowest level since 2011 – the year the ebook craze took off as Jeff Bezos’ market-dominating Amazon Kindle took the UK by storm. 

 Agency, by the famously prescient SF author, imagines an alternative US where voters have elected their first female president  Science fiction writer William Gibson is to use the dream of a Hillary Clinton win in last year’s US presidential election as the launch point for his next novel. Gibson, who coined the word “cyberspace” in his 1984 debut Neuromancer, will reimagine the world under a Clinton presidency in his next novel Agency, as well as London in the distant future. Due out in January 2018, the novel will travel between two periods: one in present-day San Francisco, where Clinton’s White House ambitions are realised; and the other in a post-apocalyptic London, 200 years into the future after 80% of the world population has been killed. 

 A Small Death, the Saudi novelist’s historical novel about a Sufi mystic and adventurer, takes $50,000 honour for ‘striking artistry’  A historical novel about the life and adventures of an Andalusian adventurer and Sufi mystic has taken the most prestigious prize in Arabic fiction. Saudi author Mohammed Hasan Alwan won the $50,000 (£39,000) International prize for Arabic fiction for A Small Death, his fictional account of the life of Sunni scholar Muhyiddin Ibn ‘Arabi. The novel follows him from his birth in Muslim Spain in 1165 to his death in Damascus in 1240, taking in journeys from Andalusia to Azerbaijan, and his reflections on the violence witnesses in Morocco, Egypt, the Hejaz (now part of Saudi Arabia), Syria, Iraq and Turkey. A contentious figure in history, Ibn ‘Arabi has been declared the foremost spiritual leader in Sufism by some, but condemned as an apostate by others. 

 Book telling the father-son story of a motorcycle trip across the western United States was published in 1974 and quickly became a best-seller Robert Pirsig, author of the influential 1970s philosophical novel Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance , has died at the age of 88. Peter Hubbard, executive editor of his publisher William Morrow &amp; Co, said in a statement that Pirsig’s wife Wendy had confirmed his death at his home in Maine “after a period of failing health”. 

 Maylis de Kerangal’s Mend the Living, which tracks the journey of a heart from donor to recipient, is only the second novel to take the £30,000 award A novel that “illustrates what it is to be human” has become the first translated book to win the Wellcome prize for science writing.  Maylis de Kerangal’s Mend the Living , which tracks the journey of a heart from donor to recipient over 24 hours, is only the second novel ever to scoop the £30,000 prize, which is awarded to a work of fiction or nonfiction that engages with health and medicine. 

 Conservationist, whose memoir I Dreamed of Africa became a Hollywood film, left critically wounded after armed men ransacked a lodge on her estate Author and conservationist Kuki Gallmann, whose memoir I Dreamed of Africa was turned into a Hollywood film starring Kim Basinger, has been shot by raiders at her ranch in Kenya. The 73-year-old is reported to have suffered extensive internal injuries and is in “a stable, but critical” condition. 

 Reissues aim to restore her darker stories of village intrigue for grownups to the popularity they once enjoyed Richmal Crompton has long been overshadowed by her creation Just William, but the darker side of her imagination is set to be rediscovered, with several of her lesser-known adult novels coming back into print. Although best known for her 38 books about the errant schoolboy William Brown and his gang of Outlaws, Lancashire-born Compton was a prolific writer for both children and adults, often publishing two books a year, as well as writing short stories magazines. “She wrote 41 adult novels as well as the Just William books,” her new publisher Harriet Sanders said. “They did very well at the time and display something that you see in other writers of children’s books … the clarity with which they are written.” 

 TV host and bestselling author who was fired on Wednesday after multiple sexual harassment claims came to light, retains support of Henry Holt Fox News may have abandoned Bill O’Reilly, but the beleaguered TV host, who was sacked on Wednesday following sexual harassment claims, has found support from his publisher Henry Holt, which has promised to stand by the bestselling author.  Related:  A timeline of Bill O'Reilly's downfall: another Fox News founding father exits  

 Letter from ‘jealous’ author, as well as another by Gustave Flaubert defending Madame Bovary will be sold from collection worth an estimated €3m A treasure trove of letters and diaries revealing the secrets of some of France’s greatest literary figures is about to go on sale in Paris. Correspondence and journals by Gustave Flaubert, Victor Hugo and Marcel Proust are among 230 lots to be sold alongside a rare first edition of Galileo’s Discorsi on 26 April. Amassed by Geneva-based Jean Bonna, who has been described as the greatest collector of French literature in the world, the collection is a fraction of material acquired over the past 50 years. Bonna said he was streamlining his collection to concentrate on French literature. Admitting he felt “a little bit sad” to sell the Galileo, which is expected to make in excess of €700,000 (£585,000), he added: “It is a wonderful book, and the best copy I have ever seen, but it does not belong in my collection because it is a scientific book and not French literature.” 

 $50,000 prize for Australian women writers goes to novel based on Marina Abramović’s performance of The Artist is Present Heather Rose has won the 2017 Stella prize for Australian women writers for her novel, The Museum of Modern Love, based on the artwork of Serbian-born performance artist Marina Abramović. “It’s by far the biggest thing that’s ever happened in my career,” Rose told Guardian Australia. 

 Dear World, which will recount the young Twitter activist’s experience of war and flight from her war-torn home, is scheduled for autumn release A seven-year-old Syrian refugee whose tweets from war-torn Aleppo won her a global following is set to write a book. Bana Alabed’s Dear World will recount her experiences in Syria and how she and her family rebuilt their lives as refugees. Simon &amp; Schuster plans to publish it in the US this autumn.  The self-declared peace activist took to the social media network that made her name to announce the news. “I am happy to announce my book will be published by Simon &amp; Schuster. The world must end all the wars now in every part of the world,” she tweeted to her 368,000 followers. 

 The Handmaid’s Tale author’s appearance in the TV version of her novel is only the latest in a surprisingly illustrious roll call of bookish bit parts Be honest: at some point in our lives, most of us have dreamed about being slapped across the face by Margaret Atwood. But we literary masochists must settle for living vicariously through actor Elizabeth Moss, who receives a smart smack to the face from the author, when Atwood appears as a guard at the centre where Moss’s character Offred is indoctrinated in the ways of America’s new theocracy. Seeing the author turn villain to her heroine is a delightful little detail in Hulu’s new TV adaptation of The Handmaid’s Tale. Here are some of the best surprise appearances by an author in an adaptation of their own work – omitting cameos by Marvel’s Stan Lee (too ubiquitous), as well as author cameos in film and TV they didn’t write. Points on that front go to Jonathan Franzen and Michael Chabon exchanging fisticuffs in an episode of the Simpsons (“That’s it Franzen! I think your nose needs some Corrections! ”); Truman Capote appearing as a “Truman Capote lookalike” in Annie Hall; and Salman Rushdie, for some excellent eyebrow acting when Bridget Jones asks where the loos are. 

 The US is in crisis - what about its literature? Michelle Dean reports on the list of American writers to watch this decade, which is as diverse as the country itself  The 2017 list in full  It is a strange time to be making declarations about the nature of American writing. The country’s not exactly feeling well. And even before the events of last autumn, it used to be easier to know what people meant when they spoke of Great American Novels. They meant, chiefly, fat realist ones, usually authored by men. Philip Roth was the avatar of success in that model. He’d put America in the title, construct his characters around some kind of American archetype, and he was off and running.  Related:  Granta’s list of the best young American novelists  

 John Steinbeck’s story of kindness among eccentric unfortunates is full of jokes and fond nostalgia – as well as quiet profundity Cannery Row is a “kind of nostalgic thing”, according to John Steinbeck. He wrote it, as he explained in a 1953 essay, “for a group of soldiers who said to me: ‘Write something funny that isn’t about the war. Write something for us to read - we’re sick of war.’” If you like, you can take that statement at face value. First, it is a funny book, funny in a way that hasn’t gone stale in the 70 years since its first publication. Jokes about booze and sex and food tend to have a good shelf life. And Steinbeck’s ribald gags have a perennial joy about them, even when he’s talking about something as antiquated as the Model T: “Two generations of Americans knew more about the Ford coil than the clitoris.” 

 Your space to discuss the books you are reading and what you think of them  Are you on Instagram? Then you can be featured here by tagging your books-related posts with #GuardianBooks  Scroll down for our favourite literary links  Read more Tips, links and suggestions blogs  Welcome to this week’s blog, and our roundup  of your comments and photos from last week. To start, a quick, but unarguable endorsement for JG Farrell’s The Siege Of Krishnapur from ohehir : 

 Translated by the late Richard McKane, this strikingly love-deprived love poem is a fine example of the author’s intense focus on personal experience  In the Evening  There was such inexpressible sorrow in the music in the garden. The dish of oysters on ice smelt fresh and sharp of the sea. 

 Male critics have long expounded a literary canon that mirrors their own lives. Such narrow reading is not restricted to men, but their example is a caution After centuries of being told by men what is good and what is bad, what is art and what is garbage, what is important and what is trivial, women have decided to fight against this with a form of writing that can best be summarised as “Ack! Men!” The latest entry in this medium is an Electric Lit essay called Men Recommend David Foster Wallace to Me , where a woman who was told by several men that she might enjoy the Infinite Jest author’s work explains that no, she does not enjoy it and this is interesting because, you know, Ack! Men! This would not even merit a response – except that so many people assumed that it did. Women on social media responded with their own Ack! Men! chorus and some men, so delightfully oblivious, chimed in with things along the lines of: “Infinite Jest is actually a really important book and if you read it you would understand.” That obliviousness does indeed make one want to yell ACK! out the window and into the night, but hopefully we can find something else to say. 

 Donald Trump loves Reasons to Vote Democrat, a volume of white space that follows a number of liberal spoofs with the same content. I prefer less vacant jokes It’s a product worthy of Reggie Perrin’s Grot shop – the store opened to sell tat in David Nobbs’s magnificent satire of modern life: a book called Reasons to Vote Democrat by Michael J Knowles , which contains only a smattering of words – title page, contents and chapter headings – in its 265 pages. The rest is blank. “Ho! Ho! Ho!” tweeted president Donald Trump as his recommendation sent Reasons to Vote Democrat up the bestseller charts. It isn’t the only blank book produced on the back of current divisions in US politics: Oregon Democrat Cylvia Hayes got there first, with Surprising Reasons to Think That Trump Will Be a (Bigly) Great President! – 150 pages, entirely blank. 

 This story of easygoing, thirsty paisanos was an immediate hit with readers who found the characters ‘quaint’, and made the author regret his creation Tortilla Flat was the book that made John Steinbeck’s name – and his fortune. By the time it was published in May 1935, he’d managed to publish four other books, but they had been poorly received. He was in his 30s, close to the breadline, living in a house his father had given him and largely dependent on his wife’s paychecks. And then the reviews started rolling in for Tortilla Flat. The San Francisco Chronicle called it “exceptionally fine”. “Not since the days of WW Jacobs making his charming characters out of scoundrels has there been a book quite like this one,” said the New Republic. The Spectator suggested that the book might make “a wet afternoon wetter for its readers”, as they cried both with laughter and sadness. The Saturday Review admired its “facile style and the whimsical humour underlying its sharp and clear-cut presentation of character”. 

 It is a delusional form of patriotism that lies behind the ‘populism’ of recent political upheavals It must be a great feeling – at once warm and calming, a sense of profound belonging, of inclusion into the greater group, and through that to the very land itself. At the same time, it must be a rousing feeling – stirring, even – especially when certain key cues are introduced: flapping flags, largo music, marching men, a familiar profile on a reviewing stand. I can see&nbsp;for myself that the reaction is Pavlovian: the eyes water, the heart fills, the head swims. There must be a&nbsp;sense of justness – that you’re a component part of a great and ongoing historical development, one that can only progress towards a kind of civic perfection. Yes, it must be a great feeling, this patriotism of which people speak; and yet, for myself, I’ve never experienced it. My own compromised nationality may be to blame, at least in part – my father was British (at least to begin with), and my mother American. I was born in the old Charing Cross Hospital in central London, and for most of my life I’ve cleaved to my identity as a Londoner, rather than any other. My mother registered me as a US citizen at birth – but I never made any use of this status until after 9/11, when it became nigh impossible for those such as myself (with minor and very old convictions for drug offences) to get&nbsp;a visa on a British passport. At JFK airport they questioned my citizenship with this fructuous question: 'Mr Self, are you an apple or a pear?' 

 Bardic men behaving badly, from Lord Byron to Robert Lowell, are traditionally excused – while women poets are written off if they step out of line  News: Unseen Plath letters claim domestic abuse by Ted Hughes  While Sylvia Plath’s verse is peppered with allusions to the tempestuous domesticity of her marriage to Ted Hughes, he has retained his reputation. Beyond legal concerns, there are tricky factors to consider: the ambiguity of intimacy in general, the fragile and synergistic creativity of both poets, and the ultimate decision of the one who remained – Hughes – to destroy the last journal and correspondence of Plath, who didn’t. The sum of it all has been the calcification of two camps: those who do not see Hughes’s poetic genius as exculpating his behaviour, and the others who see it as exactly that.  Related:  Unseen Sylvia Plath letters claim domestic abuse by Ted Hughes  

 The novelist’s Essex Serpent is getting its own beer, which makes you wonder what other marketing opportunities books could offer A rich, copper-hued bitter with “hints of roasted nuts and floral aromas” may not have been the first thing that readers thought of as they settled into Sarah Perry’s The Essex Serpent . But her publisher Serpent’s Tale hopes an ale from East Anglia’s Saffron Brewery created to mark the book’s paperback launch this month will entice beer drinkers to imbibe the much-praised novel, too. Books and beverages have a long, intertwined relationship. Who doesn’t love a pint, or tea – or a pint of tea – while reading? It is rare, however, for the delights created in the kitchens of authors’ imaginations to inspire real-life concoctions available in supermarkets. Which is sad, as novelists often have readers’s mouths watering; in fact, one cannot help but wonder why the grey suits in food and drink marketing haven’t turned to literature for delicious inspiration before. 

 Her novel The Fountainhead is one of the few works of fiction that Donald Trump likes and she has long been the darling of the US right. But only now do her devotees hold sway around the world As they plough through their GCSE revision, UK students planning to take politics A-level in the autumn can comfort themselves with this thought: come September, they will be studying one thinker who does not belong in the dusty archives of ancient political theory but is achingly on trend. For the curriculum includes a new addition: the work of Ayn Rand . It is a timely decision because Rand, who died in 1982 and was alternately ridiculed and revered throughout her lifetime, is having a moment. Long the poster girl of a particularly hardcore brand of free-market fundamentalism – the advocate of a philosophy she called “ the virtue of selfishness ” – Rand has always had acolytes in the conservative political classes. The Republican speaker of the US House of&nbsp;Representatives, Paul Ryan, is so committed a Randian, he was famous for giving every new member of his staff a copy of Rand’s gargantuan novel, Atlas Shrugged (along with Freidrich Hayek’s Road to Serfdom ). The story, oft-repeated, that his colleague in the US Senate, Rand Paul , owes his first name to his father Ron’s adulation of Ayn (it rhymes with “mine”) turns out to be apocryphal, but Paul describes himself as a fan all&nbsp;the same . 

 From ‘bigly’ to tweetspeak – the US president’s vocabulary is ripe for satire The Reader’s Digest used to run a feature called It Pays to Increase Your Word Power. The new wisdom – post-Trump and Brexit – is that it doesn’t. How Donald Trump has come so far with so few words – how he even managed to keep up conversationally with all those beauty queens – is a question I don’t expect ever to be solved. Which isn’t to say we haven’t been confronted with similar conundrums before. “The President of the United States has so singular a combination of defects for the office of a constitutional magistrate,” wrote the Atlantic magazine of Andrew Johnson in 1866 , “that he could have obtained the opportunity to misrule the nation only by a visitation of Providence.” It is too early to say whether Trump will misrule the nation, and any such speculation is not the object of this article. Andrew Johnson, by all accounts, did have words and, on occasion, even eloquence. This doesn’t detract from the ugliness of his views, but it partially explains how he came by his opportunity. In the absence of anything resembling eloquence, what explains the ascendancy of Donald Trump?  Related:  Trump’s rhetoric: a triumph of inarticulacy  

Using soap opera-style breakup metaphors to describe Britain’s EU departure is part of a cheapening of politics Don’t call Brexit a divorce, said Theresa May recently. “I prefer not to use the term of&nbsp;divorce from the European Union because very often when people get divorced they don’t have a very good relationship afterwards,” she explained to parliament. And indeed, in her subsequent passive-aggressive article 50 letter to European council president Donald Tusk, she insisted Britain was the EU’s “closest friend and neighbour”, albeit a friend who was storming out of the EU dinner party because he didn’t like the number of foreigners among the guests. At the same time, the friend was whining over his shoulder that he really wanted a “deep and special partnership” in the future – a phrase repeated in May’s letter an embarrassingly needy six times. May’s comment, however, did not stop everyone and their dog from continuing to call Brexit a divorce. It would necessarily be a “painful” divorce after 40 years of marriage, though some said the marriage had always been “loveless” and others hoped its ending could still be “amicable”. But what exactly is the change in our status going to mean, romantically speaking? It would certainly be accounted odd if a married couple were to get divorced just so they could then enter into a “deep” and “special” civil partnership. 

 Cocoa, wood, rusks – every book has a distinctive smell. And each smell says something about how and when it was made, and where it has been What does it mean to experience a book? To a bibliophile such as Alberto Manguel , smell plays an important part. In a talk at the British Library this week, the one-time protege of Jorge Luis Borges and director of the National Library of Argentina said he was particularly partial to old Penguin paperbacks, which he loved for their odour of “fresh rusk biscuits”. Audience members responded with their own sense impressions. Peter, a pensioner, said he experienced books as smelling of salt and pepper – “that dryness when you open the cupboard … with a touch of the sea”, while 46-year-old Donna confessed that she had recently bought a book for her young son partly because it “smelled of the rain”. 

 The 2013 Bake Off finalist has fired off a series of tweets attacking celebrity cooks including Tom Kerridge, Jamie Oliver and the Hairy Bikers. So why all the culinary jibes about fad diets? At 8am on Easter Monday, Ruby Tandoh’s Guardian article urging a joyous, guilt-free attitude to food appeared online . The 2013 Bake Off finalist shared it on Twitter, then joyously fired off a series of tweets attacking a slew of celebrity cooks and diet-mongers. Tom Kerridge ’s carb-cutting dopamine diet bestseller was “total bollocks”. Buying a co-written Hemsley sisters’ offering meant “half the fucking brain cells for double the price”. Joe Wicks was “bish bash boshing himself to a multi million £££ turnover”. Even the beloved Jamie Oliver, Hairy Bikers and Lorraine Pascale were accused of “swinging from ‘comfort food’ to ‘superfood’ and back again whenever the price is right”. Jibes at culinary rivals are nothing new. Gordon Ramsay has sparred with Oliver and Marco Pierre White. Anthony Bourdain is a serial chef slicer. Delia Smith, queen of the 90s, slated Gary Rhodes and Antony Worrall Thompson – both retaliated – and later MasterChef ’s judges. Raymond Blanc bashed Bake Off although he then said sorry (criticised by him for “female tears”, Tandoh told him, “don’t be an idiot”, warming up for her post-series jab at “peacocking manchild” Paul Hollywood). Even cooking’s Queen Mum, Mary Berry , has said she wouldn’t eat at Heston Blumenthal’s Fat Duck and was seen as dissing Delia in noting that Smith “hasn’t had the advantage of having children [and so their feedback] like I have”. 

 Authors feel betrayed if readers jump forward in their stories – but it may actually enhance appreciation of their work Want to upset a novelist? Tell them you always read the end of a book when you are halfway through reading. Not only will you be marked down as a philistine, you will be condemned as someone whose disregard for the order in which they intended their book to be read makes you unfit to read it at all. That, at least, was the reaction to my unwitting confession to this habit recently. 

 Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud and Acast , and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter  Neil Gaiman is an author who needs (almost) no introduction: the mind behind much-loved novels including Neverwhere, Stardust and Coraline, all of which have been adapted for film, TV and radio. The latest to be adapted is American Gods, which starts on Amazon Prime worldwide on 1 May: a road-trip fantasy epic that follows ex-con Shadow Moon and his run-ins with gods – some old, some new – around modern America. 

 Too Much and Not the Mood is a lyrical collection of essays considering the human heart from many angles. She explains why she writes without a plan “The best ideas outrun me. That’s why I write,” Durga Chew-Bose muses in the opening essay of her first book, Too Much and Not the Mood. The relatively slim volume is packed with 14 evocative pieces that evidence that chase – from her childhood growing up in Montreal to her 20s in Brooklyn.  Just as Joan Didion homes in on small physical details, Chew-Bose loves painstakingly specific descriptions. In the sprawling, 90-page essay Heart Museum – named after an emoji – colours are “shell-pink” and a “lathery shade of peach”; a glass window doesn’t shatter, it is “veined”. 

 The American poet goes for laughs in recounting her midwest Catholic upbringing, complete with anti-abortion rallies and virginity pledges  “ My father despises cats. He believes them to be Democrats. He considers them to be little mean hillary clintons covered all over with feminist legfur.” Patricia Lockwood’s dazzling comic memoir is set in midwest America and centres on a man who likes to clean his gun, listen to Rush Limbaugh and drink from a mug that reads “I love my ‘white-collar’ job” – despite being married with five children, he is a Catholic priest. Father Lockwood, as presented here, is a truly unusual man. Upstairs in the family home, he shreds his electric guitar in a prog-rock frenzy and sips cream liqueurs (“He looked like a gigantic brownie drinking drops of dew”). He has a habit of yelling out “Hoooo-eee” for no particular reason, cooks a great deal of meat and dresses either in his full priestly regalia or nothing but his underwear (“He was wearing his most formal boxer shorts, the ones you could almost not see through”). When Patricia was 19, in 2002, she met her future husband Jason on an internet poetry forum. She was living at home – her father, a “loose, lazy pile of carnality”, was happy to spend money on himself but unable to fund his children through college. After months of exchanged messages, Jason drove from Colorado to Missouri finally to meet her. He half-assumed she would be “fifty years old and Latina”; Lockwood was worried that poets “were the sort of people who said ‘lo’ in conversation”. Her parents were naturally wary of the stranger, and Jason was greeted by her father with the screech: “Gimme your license. I got cop friends.” Though an immediate marriage proposal took place – “in the parking lot of … the most matrimonial of all grocery stores” – her mother and father were convinced Tricia was about to drive off with a murderer. It was her sister Mary who pointed out that “We are the ones who are not normal”. 

This account of one man’s rejection of American society has influenced generations of free thinkers On Independence Day 1845, an idealistic young American (Thoreau was just 28) turned his back on what he saw as his country’s depressing materialism, its commercial and industrial soullessness and took himself off to a life of solitude in a country cabin near Walden Pond, just outside Concord, Massachusetts. In his famous account of this experiment, Thoreau later wrote: “I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. 

 Places you’d be desperate to avoid in real life provide a magnetic lure in books by authors from Dickens to Du Maurier and even Richard Adams My novel, The Clocks in This House All Tell Different Times , tells the tale of a girl who travels through a dark forest and arrives at a big house. The forest is bad but the house is arguably worse – a false sanctuary inhabited by decadent aristocrats; boozy and boisterous, on the brink of turning nasty.  At some point when writing the story, I realised I was naively blundering into a long and noble tradition of books about terrible houses, much as I’ve naively blundered into many awkward, unfamiliar houses down the years. Maybe I love these places in fiction because I hate and fear them in real life. 

 The author explains how rendering the great English thriller writer into his own language taught him how to write fiction himself I was 17 when I started working on my first Icelandic translation of an Agatha Christie novel. I had been reading her books for years and had already translated a few of her short stories for Icelandic magazines, but I was astonished when her publishers offered me the opportunity to translate a whole novel. I was even more delighted when they agreed to let me start with Endless Night (little did they know that my suggestion was because it contained far fewer pages than any other Christie novel I had come across).  I would never have guessed that 15 years later I would be writing myself, and have 14 translated Christie novels to my name. Through college, law school, and even when I had started full-time work as a lawyer, I never stopped translating her. Each new title was another chance to immerse myself in her writing and to learn from her as much as I could. And translating her gave me the confidence to write a novel of my own. Christie was not just an inspiration for my writing, but a support. 

 ‘Use the Swedish concept of lagom and you will live 10 years longer – if you don’t die first’ Here in Sweden we’re getting a bit fed up with our neighbours. For the last few years, it’s been Danish hygge  this and  hygge  that, or Norwegian “back to the land culture” and, “Sorry we are so much richer than you because we’ve got huge oil reserves.” So my publishers and I thought we should try to put Sweden back on the map – and earn ourselves a few krona into the bargain.  Related:  Fancy a beer outside? There's a Scandi word for that – and so much else  

 The author on the researching the lives of pioneer female astronomers who worked at Harvard Observatory Many of my writing days are research days. While working on  The Glass Universe , such days typically began early enough to catch the 7am bus from Northampton, Massachusetts, where I was living while teaching at Smith College, to Boston’s South station – a trip of two to three hours. Then I took the T Red line a few stops to Harvard Square in Cambridge, walked to the Pusey Library, and down to the basement headquarters of the Harvard University archives. The enchanted reading room, where visiting scholars gain access to the vast holdings of historical materials, opens at 11am, and stays open for only five hours a day, five days a week. To make every available moment count, I ate a series of snacks en route so I wouldn’t need to break for lunch. (Food and drink are anathema in the reading room, ditto mints and gum.) On good days, I did not even break to go to the ladies’. Archival research strikes some people as boring or burdensome. You occasionally hear writers bemoaning the time they spent “toiling in dusty archives”. But in truth, it’s great fun. If you enjoy crosswords or detective mysteries, you would thrive on rummaging through archives. One never knows what treasures will emerge from the numbered containers that the archivists deliver to one’s table. For example, although I had a good idea of what I’d find inside the two boxes labelled “HUGFP 125.2 Annie Jump Cannon Diaries ,” I was stunned to discover a tattered trove of small volumes – some gilt-edged and leather-bound with lock and key, others plain as pocket memo pads – bearing the handwritten reminiscences from a 45-year career at the Harvard Observatory. The original correspondence files proved just as engrossing as the diaries. The philanthropist Catherine Wolfe Bruce, though she lived in a New York City mansion and made charitable contributions for amounts such as $50,000, showed an endearing frugality in her use of the blue notepaper monogrammed with her deceased brother’s initials. 

 Ahead of a public reading, Philippe Sands explores the lessons of Levi’s humanity-filled holocaust memoir I was 19 when I first read If This Is a Man , and the book filled a gap created by the shadows cast across an otherwise happy childhood home by Auschwitz and Treblinka : my maternal grandparents, rare survivors of the horrors, never talked about their experiences or those who were disappeared, and in this way Levi’s account spoke directly, and personally, offering a fuller sense of matters for which words were not permitted. His has not been the only such book – there are others, including more recent works such as Thomas Buergenthal ’s A Lucky Child , Göran Rosenberg’s A Brief Stop on the Road from Auschwit z, and Marceline Loridan-Ivans’s But You Did Not Come Back  – but it was the first. He was a messenger of detail, allowing me to see and feel matters of dread and horror: waiting for a deportation order; travelling in a cattle cart by train; descending a ramp for selection; imagining what it must be like to know you are about to be gassed and cremated; struggling for survival surrounded by people you love and hate. Levi’s voice was especially affecting, so clear, firm and gentle, yet humane and apparently untouched by anger, bitterness or self-pity. If This Is a Man is miraculous, finding the human in every individual who traverses its pages, whether a Häftling (prisoner) or Muselmann (“the weak, the inept, those doomed to selection”), a kapo or a guard. 

John Elliotson was a medical pioneer whose demonstrations of hypnotism drew large crowds. Did he go too far? Elizabeth Okey was a 17-year-old Victorian housemaid with a keen interest in men’s trousers. At least she was when she was under hypnosis – in her waking state Okey behaved like any respectable member of the servant classes. The man responsible for putting the girl into a trance was Dr John Elliotson, who also happened to have a thing about nether dressing. Rather than wear the black knee breeches and silk stockings expected of a professor of medicine at University College London, Elliotson opted instead for new-fangled trews. This flourish didn’t simply mark the young man out as a dandy, it also hinted at his willingness to cross the usual boundaries. Elliotson’s method of getting Okey into a trance was to make “passes” at her, waving his hands gently in front of her face, almost, but not quite, brushing her exquisite “Grecian features”. All this sauciness was licensed by science. Okey was a charity patient at University College Hospital and suffered from “fits”, although whether this was actually epilepsy is anyone’s guess. By putting her into a mesmeric trance – named after the German Dr Mesmer who had devised the method – Elliotson found that, once the girl’s initial flightiness had passed, she settled into a fit-less calm that could last for weeks. This was gratifying to Elliotson, who was a decent, caring doctor with a mission to help the poor of Camden, who clustered around the doors of UCH desperate for relief. 

 Taplin’s starting point is the music of Levon Helm and the Band, but the fight against the spoiled brats of Google, Amazon and Facebook is much bigger In 2012, Jonathan Taplin took part in a public debate with Alexis Ohanian, the founder of Reddit , about what the digital economy was doing to the creative arts. Taplin, who had once been manager of the Band, and was the producer of Martin Scorsese ’s magnificent film of their farewell concert  The Last Waltz , had a particular grievance about the fate of his friend Levon Helm , the Band’s drummer. Helm was suffering from cancer, but had been forced back on the road at the age of 70 to help pay his medical bills because the new culture of “free music and movies” had destroyed his income as a recording artist. Ohanian, clearly a little chastened by this tale, wrote to Taplin offering to help “make right what the music industry did to members of the Band”. He suggested a reunion concert or album, funded by kickstarter, and launched on Reddit . Taplin’s reply, which he reprints here in all its eviscerating glory, points out that this plan won’t work because in the meantime Helm has died. Moreover, he tells Ohanian, “It wasn’t the music industry that created Levon’s plight; it was people like you.” He concludes: “You are so clueless as to offer to get the Band back together for a charity concert, unaware that three of the five members are dead. Take your charity and shove it. Just let us get paid for our work and stop deciding that you can unilaterally make it free.” Ohanian, unsurprisingly, did not respond. 

This true story of a man’s kidnapping in Chechnya confirms Guy Delisle’s position as one of the greatest modern cartoonists In 1997, Christophe André, a young Frenchman who was working as an administrator for Médecins Sans Frontières in Ingushetia in the north Caucasus, was woken in the middle of the night by a gang of armed men. At first, he thought they’d come to raid the NGO’s safe: the next day was pay day and it was bulging with cash. But when they bundled him into a car and drove him over the border into Chechnya, he realised things were perhaps more serious than he had at first believed. The victim of a kidnapping, he would spend the next three months alone in a dark room, handcuffed to a radiator. Three months, one room. This is, to say the least, extremely challenging territory for a cartoonist. Somehow, though, Guy Delisle – the French-Canadian artist who is best known for such award-winning travelogues as Pyongyang: A Journey in North Korea and Jerusalem: Chronicles from the Holy City – has turned André’s account of his weeks of hell into a gripping visual narrative. The days unfold monotonously, punctuated only by bowls of thin soup and the occasional trip to the bathroom. Of troubled Chechnya and its people we see almost nothing until the book’s final pages, when André makes a daring escape. But in the end, this is of no consequence. In Hostage , it’s the treacherous landscape of the mind that Delisle determinedly makes his own. 

The letters of Augustus John’s first wife, who forfeited her art for child-rearing and a most unconventional marriage, make for wickedly entertaining reading As Virginia Woolf whimsically calculated, the world became modern “on or about December 1910”. Sadly, that was too late for Ida John, an artistically gifted and boldly emancipated “New Woman” who died in 1907. “I must create something,” Ida insisted in a letter to one of her female confidantes; all she asked was “a studio and ability to paint for myself”. But artistic creativity was still a male prerogative and when a teenage girl of her acquaintance said that she too wanted to paint, Ida could only ironically advise her to “be a man”. Ida defied her stuffy family to marry the raffish society portraitist Augustus John , after which her occupation turned out to be breeding. She came to think of herself merely as “a Belly” and thought she had the gooey consistency of a suet pudding. When Gus, as she called him, took up with a mistress named Dorelia, Ida in desperation agreed to cohabit with the minx-like newcomer in an Edwardian seraglio. 

James Hawes’s brief yet rewarding history of Germany examines its place in a continent in the throes of upheaval In AD843, Charlemagne’s grandsons divided his empire like mafia bosses parcelling out territory. Louis received the land we were to later call Germany. A large part of it had been in the Roman empire, lying behind the Limes Germanicus, the great wall the Romans built to keep out the barbarians to the east. Cologne, Stuttgart, Vienna, Bonn, Mainz and Frankfurt, all the greatest cities of the future West Germany and Austria, with the exception of Hamburg, grew up within or in the immediate shadow of Rome’s western&nbsp;empire. Louis knew where his kingdom began – Germany began at the Rhine, of course. He knew, too, that at its heart were territories that were now Catholic lands and had once been part of the Roman empire. But where did Germany end? He wasn’t sure, nor was anyone else. The Treaty of Verdun, which managed the partition, simply assigned Louis “everything beyond the Rhine”. It left open the question of where “everything” stopped. Did Germany end at the Elbe, where Charlemagne’s rule had stopped, or could it go on into the Slav lands to the east, whose rulers had paid tribute to Charlemagne? 

 Charles Saumarez Smith’s ‘connoisseur’s’ tour of the East End is enjoyable but unashamedly whimsical Who will admit to being a gentrifier? Who will confess to being part of that rent-inflating urban scourge, over which so many hands are wrung, that lays a plague of artisanal bread and absurd beards upon the land, which like the enclosures of yore sends widows and orphans and honest craftsmen weeping into exile? Who will sing that they’re glad to gentrify?  Charles Saumarez Smith , that’s who. The secretary and chief executive of the Royal Academy of Arts, owner of a double-fronted Georgian house in Stepney – before that a terrace house in Limehouse, bought in 1982 – lets you know in the very first sentence of his book on east London, with lack of cant, that he is not your traditional cockney diamond geezer. 

A cast of highwaymen, psychics and joggers populates Will Ashon’s glorious foray into the London woodland Ten years ago, you couldn’t walk 10 paces in Hackney or Peckham without bumping into a flâneur botanising the tarmac, but as London continues to gentrify even the psychogeographers are being moved out. Many London writers now seem more interested in the edge of things than the centre. One such is Will Ashon and his first work of nonfiction, Strange Labyrinth , is an anarchic hymn to the scruffy edgeland of Epping Forest, the ancient wood that sits on the boundary between London and Essex. The forest was “saved for the nation” by the Corporation of London in 1878, “in effect making it the UK’s first national park”, but what was once a cockney paradise is now attractive mainly to dog walkers, joggers, doggers and cruisers. 

 A neuroscientist argues that all experience occurs in the brain – and that the brain is deluded Beau Lotto is a gung-ho neuroscientist. “[The] great minds of history,” he says, “had theories, but now neuroscience has an answer.” The latest research has, it seems, established that everything you experience “takes place in the brain” and that “you never, ever see reality!” (Lotto loves his italics and exclamation marks.) Your brain may be beautiful, but “what makes it beautiful is that it is delusional” and you should therefore get shot of your inhibitions and summon the courage to “deviate!” Perhaps we should back up a little. Early in the book, Lotto mentions a French scientist called Michel Chevreul who started working at the Gobelins textile factory in Paris in the 1820s. Chevreul had to deal with complaints about coloured yarns that seemed to fade after being woven into tapestries, and his patient chemical analyses did not get him anywhere. But then he shifted his attention from the science of dyestuffs to the psychology of perception, and he was on the way to a solution: colours, he discovered, change their appearance when looked at side by side. 

 A readable history of snooping in Britain and US argues that private spying organisations have done as much harm as the state  When the US government contractor Edward Snowden disclosed the extent of the global eavesdropping operation being run by the National Security Agency, GCHQ and their partners in Australia, Canada and New Zealand, many people spoke, aghast, of the way in which the 21st century appeared to have ushered in a new age of surveillance. Yet spying on a mass scale has of course been with us for as long as governments have been skittish about foreign powers or uncertain about the loyalties of their own citizens. When Oliver Cromwell established the Post Office as a state monopoly in 1657, he did so not because he wished to improve England’s communications, but because the opening of mail was considered to be “the best means to discover and prevent any dangerous and wicked designs against the Commonwealth”. 

 This examination of today’s tech-zombie epidemic is worth putting your phone down for – at least for a while Are you addicted to technology? I’m certainly not. In my first sitting reading Adam Alter’s Irresistible , an investigation into why we can’t stop scrolling and clicking and surfing online, I only paused to check my phone four times. Because someone might have emailed me. Or texted me. One time I&nbsp;stopped to download an app Alter mentioned (research) and the final time I had to check the shares on my play brokerage app, Best Brokers (let’s&nbsp;call this one “business”). Half the developed world is addicted to something, and Alter, a professor at New York University, informs us that, increasingly, that something isn’t drugs or alcohol, but behaviour. Recent studies suggest the most compulsive behaviour we engage in has to do with cyber connectivity; 40% of us have some sort of internet-based addiction – whether it’s checking your email (on average workers check it 36 times an hour), mindlessly scrolling through other people’s breakfasts on Instagram or gambling online. 

 A bravura account asks whether recent terrorist atrocities represent the radicalisation of Islam or nihilism in search of an alibi Are the teachings of the Prophet Muhammad responsible for modern jihadism, or does the terrorists’ ignorance of their religion show that Islam is cover for inner disquiets that make more sense to the psychologist than the imam? Last July’s lorry massacre on the Promenade des Anglais in Nice was committed by an unstable libertine who had only recently discovered jihadism. What, if anything, did his actions have in common with the riots that followed the death in police custody of Adama Traoré , a young man from a Malian Muslim family, in a depressed Parisian suburb, also last summer? Do they testify to the inexorable advance of radical Islamist ideology, or the seductive power of any false cause for modernity’s losers?  Related:  Who are the new jihadis? | Olivier Roy | The long read  

 Patience Ibrahim and co-writer Andrea C Hoffmann craft a vivid and valuable account of trauma and survival This harrowing book, subtitled How I Escaped With My Daughter from Boko Haram, tells the story of newly pregnant 19-year-old Nigerian Patience, whose husband and mother were murdered by militants. One day, she is kidnapped by Boko Haram and her ordeal is recounted in unflinching detail: the beatings, rapes and torture meted out to her and fellow prisoners and how she escaped and survived with her baby daughter, Gift. The book is co-written with Andrea C Hoffmann, a journalist and expert on victim traumatisation, and switches between Hoffmann’s account of visiting Nigeria, the challenges of interviewing Patience about her painful past and vivid accounts from Patience herself. Translated by Shaun Whiteside, this is a valuable document, contributing raw experience of terror, trauma and recovery, as well as insight into the techniques of telling the most traumatic of stories. • A Gift from Darkness by Patience Ibrahim and Andrea C Hoffmann is published by Little, Brown (£13.99). To order a copy for £11.89 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99 

 Donna Seaman resurrects forgotten artists and their work in inspiring fashion  In this passionate book, Seaman (daughter of artist Elayne Seaman) asks why seven American female artists – Louise Nevelson, Gertrude Abercrombie, Loïs Mailou Jones, Ree Morton, Joan Brown, Christina Ramberg, Lenore Tawney – respected and celebrated in their lifetimes, have been forgotten or nearly so. Seaman resurrects and reanimates. The women come to life here; grouchy, impish, shy, confident, introspective, scrounging and childish. Seaman also provides multiple interpretations of artworks, creating dialogues and instigating conversations that have for so long been missing and discusses how the gender of these accomplished artists led to society forgetting them. This is an inspiring and beautifully written book that will encourage the reader to research further and discover more. • Identity Unknown by Donna Seaman is published by Bloomsbury (£25). To order a copy for £21.25 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99 

 The story of the gifted virtuoso who grew up to international stardom – and then her beloved violin was stolen In Gone , Min Kym’s memoir about her life as a violin soloist, she relates a possibly apocryphal legend about the French violinist Ginette Neveu, who was touring when her plane crashed into a mountain. She died, as did everyone else in the plane. In the wreckage, Neveu’s corpse was discovered with her beloved Stradivarius still gripped in her hand. Kym, like Neveu, was a child prodigy who grew up to be a brilliant professional musician; also like Neveu, Kym played, and loved, a Stradivarius, one of just 449 in the world. But Kym lost her Stradivarius when she was 31 years old, a loss so terrible it left her unable to play the violin. From age six, Kym hadn’t gone a day without practising. When she started learning to play the instrument, she “felt like a creature released, alive in herself for the first time”. Even then, she says, “I knew I could play anything. Anything. This was not arrogance – I was a shy child, reluctant to come forward, to give voice, to take centre stage – but more simply that I had found, not only my home and my voice, but my element.” Others agreed. Kym’s chronicle of childhood glitters with the wunderkind’s starry achievements: the first this, the youngest that. Concert soloist at 10 years old. Youngest pupil ever at the prestigious Purcell School. When she was 12, Kym was playing professionally in five to six concerts a year; at 13, she had her debut concerto with the Berlin Symphony Orchestra. She performed with the pianist Vladimir Ashkenazy , won prizes, played in Madrid, Seoul, Bologna and Seville. 

 The sense of an ending hangs over this humorous, compassionate novel about a fractious family taking a last road trip together It takes chutzpah to argue with Tolstoy but, four novels into his career, Edward Docx has mustered sufficient confidence to take issue with the master. “I’m not sure Tolstoy had it right. All families, happy or sad, conceal a great deal of dark matter. Something greater than the known physics or chemistry, something that must create the dark energy that holds them together or pushes them apart.” Docx has earned the right to his opinion: his 2007 Man Booker long-listed novel  Self Help  was a dark-hearted family drama partly set in St Petersburg that deliberately courted comparison with 19th-century Russian epics. In that book, a pair of half-Russian twins were summoned home to deal with the unexpected death of their mother. Let Go My Hand features a part-Russian narrator named Louis and his elder twin half-brothers, who drive across Europe to deal with the death of their father: the twist being that Dad isn’t actually dead yet, but intends to be in the very near future. 

One of America’s most notorious murder cases inspires this feverish debut about family resentments and frustrations “ Lizzie Borden took an axe, and gave her mother 40 whacks. When she saw what she had done, she gave her father 41 …” A century and a quarter after Andrew and Abby Borden were murdered with a hatchet on a sweltering Massachusetts morning, the skipping rhyme still resonates and the case of Lizzie Borden – arrested, tried and acquitted by a jury unable to believe a woman could do such a thing – continues to fascinate. It has been immortalised in countless books, a TV series, a short story by Angela Carter ; a film starring Chloë Sevigny and Kristen Stewart is due to be released this year. The house where the killings took place is now a B&amp;B-cum-museum, with the most requested room the one where Abby was murdered. Tours run every hour; free for children six and under. You can buy a Lizzie Borden doll . Sarah Schmidt’s debut novel is a feverish reimagining of the day of the murders, the leadup and aftermath, told by four voices: Lizzie, her older sister Emma, the maid Bridget, and a dangerous stranger called Benjamin, who is linked to the family by Lizzie and Emma’s maternal uncle John. 

 This stunning Bangalore-set family drama underlines the necessity of reading beyond our borders G hachar Ghochar is the English-language debut of a writer already established as a leading figure in both the pan-Indian and Kannada-language literary scenes. Once again, reading beyond our tiny borders shows us what we’ve been missing, and proves the necessity of translation for a dynamic literary culture : Ghachar Ghochar is both fascinatingly different from much Indian writing in English, and provides a masterclass in crafting, particularly on the power of leaving things unsaid. In fewer than 28,000 words, Vivek Shanbhag weaves a web of suggestion and implication, to be read with a sense of mounting unease. The opening chapter demonstrates how the short novel is the perfect form for Shanbhag’s particular talents: precise observations, accumulation of detail, narrative progression by way of oblique tangents. It opens in a Bangalore coffee shop, whose name hasn’t changed in a hundred years, andwhere the unnamed narrator unburdens himself to laconic waiter Vincent. The latter is splendidly outfitted in cummerbund and turban, and Coffee House’s tasteful oak-panelled walls are decorated with old photographs showing “just how beautiful this city was a century ago”. The narrator has no reason to be there, he confesses, “but who can admit to doing something for no reason in times like these, in a city as busy as this one?” 

 Virtual hallucinations and tricksy Matrix-style visions dominate a 21st-century immortality quest It’s late in the 21st century. New York City has drowned, and the reversal of Pacific currents means that Tokyo is freezing. In Saudi Arabia “the mullahs rule piously over blank infernos of sand”. There are armed drones and super-powerful AIs that have been designed for thousands of generations by other AIs, so that no human understands how they work. The rich have private armies and undergo yearly rejuvenation treat-ments at exclusive clinics. But James Cromwell, an inscrutable billionaire already more than 100 years old, wants more time. And someone unknown has sent him proof of a concept for an elixir of immortality. The question is, what does this party want in return?  Related:  The Lost Books of the Odyssey by Zachary Mason | Book review  

Her debut thriller was a phenomenon, but here an embarrassment of narrators and the clunky withholding of information is death to suspense More accidents happen in the home than anywhere else, a fact to lend some much-needed plausibility to the overworked genre of domestic suspense, or grip-lit as it’s sometimes known. About 60 debut novels cross my desk every year (I&nbsp;chair the New Blood panel at the Theakston Old Peculier crime writing festival ), and for the last three or four years, the&nbsp;proportion of this subgenre has been rising. Not a problem in itself: if the books were original, well written or thought-provoking, nobody would be happier than I. But sadly that’s not generally been the case. There have been notable exceptions, of course: clever, suspenseful reads such as Renée Knight’s Disclaimer  or Ben McPherson’s A Line of Blood . Then there are the mega-sellers such as Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl , SJ&nbsp;Watson’s Before I Go to Sleep   and Paula Hawkins’s The Girl on the Train , which all gave us interesting twists on the idea of the unreliable narrator. 

 Reflections on mortality – filtered by the poet’s experience of illness – run through this wide-ranging and consummate collection Helen Dunmore is a much admired and widely read novelist, but she began her writing career as a poet. Many of the strengths of her fiction were already present in her early collections of poems – for example, the capacity to render the physical world as a tangible presence, or her dramatic grasp of how character begins to disclose itself, or the ability to let a story seem to tell itself rather than be explained. She remarked in the early 90s that she was trying “to do without scaffolding” in her poetry, and successive volumes have demonstrated the developing success of that approach. The central subject of Inside the Wave is mortality, seen through Dunmore’s experience of cancer. She has made it known that the prognosis is poor. “Pain is yards away / Held off like bad weather”, but the beauty and fascination of the world are undiminished as the continuity of living and dying becomes apparent. There is a tree at the window, or fishermen are seen returning to shore with their catch. There is “the rock where the seaweed clings / And the red anemone throbs in its crevice / Through swash and backwash”. In “The Underworld”, Dunmore notes: 

 In the author’s first novel for seven years, formal experimentation gives way to a delicate, subtle study of the effects of a disappearance on a village’s inhabitants  Jon McGregor has been quietly building a reputation as one of the outstanding writers of his generation since 2002, when he became the youngest writer to be longlisted for the Booker prize with his debut, If Nobody Speaks of Remarkable Things , published when he was 26. Reservoir 13 is only his fourth novel, but it confirms his gift as a poet of ordinary lives and his skill in taking risks with form and style. After the experimental narrative of 2010’s  Even the Dogs , a story of drug and alcohol addiction told in fragmented bursts by a series of urban ghosts, Reservoir 13 may seem, at first glance, a more conventional and pastoral novel. This could come as a relief to those who felt the stylistic devices were too much to the fore in its predecessor. But Reservoir 13 offers its own subtler experimentation; a short way into the book, it becomes clear that McGregor has succeeded in pulling off one of the most difficult tricks in fiction – a true ensemble piece of storytelling. 

 With her gentle gift for unmasking human vulnerability, Elizabeth Strout has a touch of John Steinbeck and Anne Tyler For years, I didn’t read Elizabeth Strout . If I’m honest, I was put off by the titles, which seemed to be snatched from the noticeboard of a particularly cultivated old people’s home:  Amy and Isabelle  was her first novel, published in 1998, and this was followed by Abide With Me in 2006,  Olive Kitteridge  two years later and  The Burgess Boys  in 2013. I watched the HBO miniseries adaptation of  Olive Kitteridge , starring Frances McDormand, and I sort of loved it but wasn’t sure it was worth four whole hours. All of which is a roundabout way of saying that it took me longer than it should have to discover Strout’s writing. It was only with the publication of  My Name Is Lucy Barton  last year that I eventually started reading her. 

 An affirmation of the importance of friendship amid oppression, this vivid epic of life in a war zone is woven from the true stories of those who live there Since 1980, the people of Iraq have suffered almost ceaseless war, as well as uprisings, repressions, sanctions and conflict-related illness. The President’s Gardens , published in Arabic in 2012 and now masterfully translated by Luke Leafgren, at last provides us with an epic account of this experience from an Iraqi perspective. “If every victim had a book, Iraq in its entirety would become a huge library, impossible ever to catalogue.” This novel belongs to Ibrahim, nicknamed “the Fated”, whose life is narrated in the most detail and the discovery of whose head in a banana crate opens and closes the novel in 2006. Ibrahim’s friends since childhood, Tariq “the Befuddled” and Abdullah, known as “Kafka”, are also essential to the story. 

Grief haunts an eerie puzzle box of a story in the second novel from the Mountain Goats frontman, set in the long-gone era of VHS tapes and dial-up We live in an age when much of the fiction we consume is purpose built to not add up. In novels such as Jeff VanderMeer ’s Southern Reach trilogy and Agustín Fernández Mallo’s Nocilla sequence, TV shows such as The OA , Westworld and True Detective , and an increasing number of&nbsp;Hollywood film franchises, we encounter self-consciously labyrinthine and reflexive meta-narratives that end, when they can be said to end&nbsp;at all, in irresolution, deferral and&nbsp;ellipsis. JJ Abrams, the producer and co-creator of Lost who has helped to mainstream the idea of narrative as&nbsp;an&nbsp;endlessly open puzzle-box of allusions and intimations that simultaneously invites and resists exegesis, calls this style “the mystery box” . Part&nbsp;of the allure of such narratives is&nbsp;the participatory element: facilitated&nbsp;by social media and online fan forums, every reader and viewer who so desires&nbsp;has the chance to posit themselves as critic, theorist, prophet and de facto co-writer. When stories don’t add up, the speculation can go on&nbsp;for&nbsp;ever.  John Darnielle ’s second novel, Universal Harvester , very much fits the contemporary puzzle-box aesthetic. In&nbsp;other respects, it is strikingly and enchantingly out of time. It is set in the&nbsp;late 1990s, in those final few years before civilisation went permanently online. References abound to clunky, unintegrated tech – VHS tapes, basic “burner” cellphones and the laboured gurgle of dial-up home internet – and serve to remind us how quaint the pre-2000s now seem. We are in the town of&nbsp;Nevada, Iowa; the main character is&nbsp;Jeremy Heldt, an unprepossessing video store clerk in his early 20s and an &nbsp;inveterate homebody. Jeremy seems like something of a slacker, but&nbsp;what looks like passivity is only the ceaseless forestalling of unprocessed grief. Jeremy lost his mother in a car crash as a teenager, and since then, he and his father Steve have remained in a&nbsp;kind of permanent holding pattern. Darnielle deftly sketches out their static routines: downing cans of Milwaukee Brew they refer to as “beasts”, making the effort to&nbsp;eat their tacos at the dinner table together “like a real family”, and finishing the evenings off with whatever selection of movies Jeremy has brought home with him. As one of Darnielle’s more lovely phrases has it, the Heldts’ consolingly indistinguishable days “roll on like hills too low to give names to”. 

Set in the aftermath of the first world war, this is a twisted fairytale populated by wounded servicemen, establishment radicals and a ‘discount Aleister Crowley’ It’s 1923. Lucy Marsh and her friend Winifred, mid-teenagers from an enclave of dying pubs and dead industries in north-east London, find themselves effectively sold into prostitution by their families. Once a week in Epping Forest they meet with and service four bizarrely wounded ex‑servicemen who have given arms, legs, hands and faces for their country in the recent world war. Lucy isn’t sure if they’re named after Dorothy’s companions in The Wonderful Wizard of Oz , or if the characters in the story were named after them. The “funny men” seem as decent as they are damaged, puzzled to the point of inarticulacy by the things that have happened to them. But though they’re shy they know what they’ve lost – homes, wives, children, physical comfort, any sense of themselves as welcome in the society that sent them to fight – and they know what they want, at least from Lucy and Winifred. Xan Brooks’ first novel quickly normalises both the bizarreness and the unspoken brutality of the situation. Much of this depends on Lucy’s adaptability: throughout, she treats her clients – and indeed everyone she meets – with a kind of bemused generosity. The reader is less tempted. The funny men subsist on the charity of “the Pink Earl”, an establishment radical, and his vile son Rupert Fortnum-Hyde, whose 5,000-acre estate “rolls out on either side of the river Lea”. Their holdings include “a sugar estate in Jamaica, 12 London townhouses and an ongoing stake in the British South Africa Company”. Despite this, both conceive of themselves somehow as socialists; in addition the son presents himself as&nbsp;an experimentalist of human beings, a force for modernity and change. He surrounds himself with a permanent carnival of jazz musicians, confused interwar intellectuals, a “discount Aleister Crowley ” who has somehow failed to monetise the ability to conjure genuine flames from his fingertips, and&nbsp;a female north African camel called Edith. Everyone but the camel, including Lucy and Winifred, is plied with vast quantities of cocaine, “a drug for action, a drug for doers”, the “taste of the future” – although their only future is to be abandoned the moment Fortnum-Hyde becomes bored. 

A playful novel imagining the French novelist in contemporary life – every sentence is a delight About a third of the way through this novel we read the following, a&nbsp;scene set in a hotel restaurant. The narrator has pulled up a chair to join two characters, a&nbsp;man named Beyle and a woman named&nbsp;M.: 

This multigenerational saga, shortlisted for the Pulitzer and now the Baileys prize, explores Darwinism, horse racing and the legacies of slavery This novel is about horse racing the way Moby-Dick is about a whale; it has a similarly expansive scope, spiritual seriousness and density of grand themes. Shortlisted for the Pulitzer and now the Baileys prize , Morgan’s epic work builds to a climactic series of dramatic race scenes featuring a star filly named Hellsmouth. Along the way, Morgan wrestles with subjects including the history of Kentucky, slavery and its legacies, the iniquities of American healthcare, Darwinism, geology and relations between the sexes. In the maximalist stakes, Morgan’s novel is a muscular, confident entry. For the first 200 pages, the book appears to be a conventional multigenerational saga set in the American south. The Forge family are corn famers: in the opening section, hot-headed young Henry Forge, classically tutored and prone to trading arguments in Greek or Latin with his tyrannical father, develops a rebellious ambition to transform their farm one day into a thoroughbred breeding business. “I won’t have you throw everything away for a heap of rhinestones,” rages Henry’s father, when his son blurts out his dream. “There is no need for improvement, Henry, only adherence to a line that has never altered, because it’s never proven unsound.” The story that unfolds will reveal the faults in that Forge line, and an unsoundness at its very heart. 

 Australian author Sarah Schmidt’s debut novel is a vivid, claustrophobic retelling of the infamous 19th-century axe murders Lizzie Borden may have been acquitted for the 1892 murder of her father and stepmother but popular consciousness still brands her as guilty. Borden has been immortalised not only in nursery rhyme – “Lizzie Borden took an axe / Gave her mother forty whacks / When she saw what she had done / She gave her father forty-one” – but in a ballet, an opera, a podcast , a television miniseries starring Christina Ricci, and a host of other cultural products . Even the house in Fall River, Massachusetts, in which the family lived and where the gruesome murders occurred, is now a bed-and-breakfast museum – yes, people actually spend money to sleep over at the scene of the crime.  The Australian author Sarah Schmidt is one of them. The writer spent more than a decade obsessed with Lizzie, after the latter started appearing in her dreams . Unable to shake either the dreams or the subsequent fascination with this might-have-been murder, Schmidt began to write what would eventually become her debut novel. 

A wickedly funny and honest portrayal of love, ambition, sex – and the city Jami Attenberg ’s fifth novel is her best yet. It’s a super-smart, often extremely funny, sometimes heartbreaking portrait of a 39-year-old, single, child-free heroine in New York City who’s taking her very best shot at living life on her own terms. Andrea is far from perfect and far from living the dream, whatever that is – as this novel cleverly demonstrates, the grass isn’t always greener on the other side – but she’s all the more understandable because of it, and, thanks to her dislike of cocktails with “fruit wedges”, all the more likable too. Attenberg’s episodic approach – chapters flit between subjects, from friendship, family, sex and ambition, the chronological narrative winding through them, sometimes to the fore, sometimes in the background – may give the impression of something insubstantial, but the end result is actually the opposite. As angry, sad and raw as it is astute, hilarious and hopeful, All Grown Up puts other novels in this vein to shame. 

 This action-packed story of a rabbit craving his own space will resonate with children wanting a bit of hush There’s a telling dedication at the beginning of this new book from Pippa Goodhart , the British author best known for her Winnie the Witch series. “For my own little sister, Jo Eddleston”, it reads, “with whom I used to share a bedroom, with lots of love”. It sweetly encapsulates the spirit of this tale about personal space, featuring little rabbit Jack, who gets cross because he wants some peace, but soon craves the companionship of others. It’s a story light on words yet bustling with action. From the perky rabbits squished like sardines on to the front cover, to the whirligig opening spread of singing, sneezing, strutting bunnies, you can see why Jack’s in pursuit of a quiet corner. “SHUSH!” he cries in the first line, “I want to look at my book!” 

This year’s Easter treats swap chocolate eggs for philosophy, and fluffy chicks for JFK, but are no less touching or hilarious for it This Easter, publishers seem to be overlooking fluffy chicks and chocolate&nbsp;eggs in favour of other celebratory wild​life​. But when I took a look at of  Du Iz Tak?  by Carson Ellis (Walker £11.99) I wondered at first why anyone would bother to send me a picture book in a foreign language. Then I took a second look. This story is written in “bug language”, an idea that borders on lunacy but is in practice a joy and a quirky triumph. It is enormous fun reading this book aloud and trying to decipher exchanges between talkative insects. The illustrations are as clear as the language is alien. We witness the exuberant construction of a tree – or plant – house that, after a while, sprouts a gladdenboot. A what? A flower, silly. It is a refreshing change from the worthily educational: only the most duty-bound parent could be bugged by this (for ages four and up). Every dog you could imagine is contained within the covetable, cloth-bound pocket book   Dogs  by Emily Gravett (Two Hoots £7.99). It is a book of contrasts that depends for its success on the wonderful skill and humour of the drawings. These are not fantasy dogs – they are based on shrewd, exact and affectionate observation. When she writes: “I love stroppy dogs… and soppy dogs”, she has a huge frowning boxer and a little fluffy cur with a pink&nbsp;ribbon round its neck. Her barking dog is a tiny tearaway and her non-barking dog looks cowardly and so&nbsp;on – exactly as such dogs do. Even her sleeping dogs you would not want to let lie. A disarming pleasure to read (ages two and up). 

 An outstanding debut stages the debates convulsing America in the story of a teenager who testifies after a shooting “Girls wear their hair coloured, curled, laid, and slayed. Got me feeling basic as hell with my ponytail. Guys in their freshest kicks and sagging pants grind so close to girls they just about need condoms ...” Then gunshots shatter the music. Fleeing from the party, 16-year-old Starr is led to apparent safety by her friend Khalil. Shortly after, their car is pulled over by a police officer. What happens next crystallises the Black Lives Matter movement and indeed, the whole debate about race in America. The unarmed Khalil is murdered – shot at point blank range by the man Starr refers to from this moment on as “Officer One-Fifteen”. Starr is the only witness to the crime and her 16-year-old shoulders have to bear the ferocious outrage of her race and community. There's a chilling scene where Starr witnesses a police officer force her father to lie on the ground as he searches him 

From activists and lawyers to pirates and inventors, Elena Favilli and Francesca Cavallo present young readers with a lifetime’s supply of brilliant female role models Children’s nonfiction books about women’s lives are a long overdue trend, and this empowering, resolutely “anti-princess” storybook is a very welcome addition. Initially funded by a $1m Kickstarter campaign , the authors wrote it in response to the gender stereotyping they found across children’s books and media. One hundred extraordinary women are profiled in mini biographies alongside striking full-page portraits by female artists. Countries from across the globe are represented, with around a third of the women from the US. Elizabeth I, Ada Lovelace and Jane Austen lead the British entries, which do feel a little predictable – my daughter fruitlessly scanned through for JK Rowling; the most recent entry is Margaret Thatcher – but this is a minor gripe. 

 From Shakespeare to Enid Blyton, fiction about girls who defy ‘feminine’ stereotypes has itself been pretty stereotypical. But that may be changing  “I shall only answer if you call me George. I hate being a girl. I won’t be. I don’t like doing the things that girls do. I like doing the things that boys do.” These lines in Five on Treasure Island introduce George Kirrin, one of the most famous tomboys in fiction. Enid Blyton’s novel, opening the bestselling Famous Five series, was published in 1942, when expectations of how women should behave were clear-cut and constricting. With her short hair, love of sailing and climbing and insistence on being addressed as “Master George”, she was the opposite of her doll-loving cousin, Anne – whose brother’s description of her as “a very good little housekeeper” in Five Go Off in a Caravan is a source of personal pride. 

 Kiran Millwood Hargrave’s The Girl of Ink and Stars praised for ‘good, old-fashioned storytelling’ that recalls Philip Pullman’s His Dark Materials A novel inspired by childhood travels to the volcanic island of La Gomera and the traditional stories of the Canary islands has scooped the Waterstones children’s book prize for a 27-year-old poet and playwright. Kiran Millwood Hargrave’s debut The Girl of Ink and Stars was named overall winner of the prestigious award by children’s laureate Chris Riddell at a ceremony in the bookselling chain’s flagship store in London’s Piccadilly. 

Once, I banned my students from writing them. Now I see the magic and joy in children’s stories It was a mild early summer’s day, with buttercups everywhere. I was map reading and my partner was driving. We were somewhere in West Sussex, on a country road because I couldn’t cope with the harsh rush of the motorway. I’d recently been ill, and felt strongly that I never wanted to&nbsp;re-enter the normal world, with its clattering trucks, fluorescent litter, hashtags and memes. For the last few weeks I had only been able to read PG Wodehouse and Dodie Smith . So I felt happy in the simple nostalgic calm of the English countryside, with hamlets called things like Old Wives Lees and roads called Frog Hole Lane. And suddenly, just off the A272, was a place called Dragon’s Green. 

 This clever picture book imagines the secret world of the young Virginia Woolf and her sister Vanessa. And doesn’t shy away from tackling depression The novelist Virginia Woolf once described the bond she shared with her sister , the artist Vanessa Bell , as a “close conspiracy”. When she took her own life in 1941 she left two suicide notes behind: one for her husband and one for her beloved Vanessa. Now with beautiful splashes of colour and witty, uplifting text, the Canadian duo Kyo Maclear and illustrator Isabelle Arsenault imagine the secret childhood world the sisters created, while delicately exploring the theme of depression, in this exceptional picture book for ages 4+, finally published in Britain after its acclaimed release in Canada in 2012. 

 Two paleontologists chase the elusive ‘rex’ as their children fall in love in a fast-paced, warts-and-all western This breakneck palaeontological western is perhaps best not judged by its cover. A&nbsp;jigsaw dinosaur skeleton seems to welcome younger readers, despite the tagline’s warning that “Love lies buried”; this makes the appearance of sexual attraction (“I felt myself stiffening between my legs”)on page nine slightly disconcerting. But for a reader mature enough to handle the pungent, realistic detail of 19th-century life, it’s a fascinating, fast-paced, rich and provocative novel. Appropriately, its author specialises in adventure that takes place on boundaries and frontiers. Kenneth Oppel’s Silverwing trilogy, with its cast of migrating bats, has been compared to  Watership Down , selling over a million copies worldwide. In steampunk vein, he has written about thousand-car trains crossing Canada in  The Boundless  , and 900-ft airships crossing the Pacific in Airborn . Now he has turned his hand to&nbsp;the secrets of prehistory. 

Leading literary agent who guided Nobel- and Booker-winning novelists, and paired Roald Dahl with Quentin Blake In 1961, in a lift in Rockefeller Center in New York, a British editor working for Simon &amp; Schuster met a young literary agent. The editor was Gina Conquy; the literary agent was Murray Pollinger, visiting the city on a business trip. This meeting was to have consequences far beyond the personal: from it there resulted not only a long-lasting marriage, but also the forging of a literary agency that discovered and nurtured some of the most successful British writers of the second half of the 20th century. The profession of literary agent was still a relatively new one at the time of that meeting. Murray had been born into it: his father, Laurence Pollinger, had been the agent of, among others, DH Lawrence, Graham Greene and John Masters , the novelist who wrote about the British in India. Murray worked with the family firm until he set up on his own, running the business from a tiny office in Garrick Street, London. Gina, who has died aged 81, could not have been bettered as a choice of spouse: she had extensive editorial experience and was prepared to take the long view. She also had the necessary warmth and tenacity to guide the neophyte author into the sunny uplands of publication. 

 Adam Hargreaves, son of Mr Men creator Roger, discusses the latest expansion of the cartoon universe – into the realm of the Timelord Adam Hargreaves remembers exactly when his Dad, Roger, first created the Mr Men . Then seven years old, the curious young boy asked the kind of question young boys often ask: “Daddy, what does a tickle look like?” So Roger started sketching, perhaps not realising that he was founding a globe-spanning, £28m empire that would be going strong decades later. That first book, Mr Tickle, was published in 1971. “I think he started to realise he was on to something,” chuckles Hargreaves Jr. 

 As the BBC’s parental-respite service continues its fine tradition of giving mums something pretty to look at, we ask who can follow Captain America Chris Evans is going to read a CBeebies Bedtime Story soon. Actual Captain America, from all three thousand Captain America films, will sit down and lull the nation’s toddlers to sleep with a sonorous reading of Even Superheroes Have Bad Days by Shelly Becker and Eda Kaban on 10 May. Admittedly this is probably more interesting to parents than toddlers. My two-year-old, largely speaking, doesn’t care about the box office grosses of the people reading stories to him. He’s over the moon if they happen to be softly spoken and sincere like Nadiya Hussain from the Great British Bake Off , and actively less over the moon when, say, David Hasselhoff ends up bellowing a broken assembly line of words that sound as if they’ve been phonetically translated from Esperanto on cue cards held slightly too far away to be comfortably read. 

 Warm weather means picnics, so Kate Young recreates a recipe enjoyed by Ratty and Mole in Kenneth Grahame’s classic children’s tale  Scroll down to read the recipe  ‘There’s cold chicken inside it,’ replied the Rat briefly; ‘coldtonguecoldhamcoldbeefpickledgherkinssaladfrenchrollscresssandwichespottedmeatgingerbeerlemonadesodawater——’  ‘O stop, stop,’ cried the Mole in ecstasies: ‘This is too much!’  The Wind in the Willows , Kenneth Grahame 

 My wife Jane Eccles, who has died of cancer aged 58, was an artist who worked widely in the world of illustration, from magazine editorial work and advertising to books for many publishers. She wrote and illustrated Maxwell Monster, in 1991, and increasingly specialised in illustrating books for children. Jane forged a fruitful relationship with the publisher Macmillan, for whom she filled the pages of children’s poetry and joke books with her warm and witty drawings. 

 The prolific Australian author talks about her new novel, Miss Lily’s Lovely Ladies, and writing women into history Australian author Jackie French stopped counting how many books she’d written after she reached 100 – and that was 13 years ago. Her latest novel, Miss Lily’s Lovely Ladies (released concurrently with Millie Loves Ants , her latest children’s book), is first in a series that examine women’s changing roles in the 20th century.  Beginning in 1902, the novel follows Sophie Higgs, an Australian heiress of a corned beef factory, who attends a London finishing school for young women. The mysterious Miss Lily believes that a woman’s power lies in her ability to influence men. Under her tutelage, Sophie begins an extraordinary adventure across the Western front, and into the drawing rooms of powerful men. 

Racism and homophobia, death and dementia, amnesia and ancient history – all dilemmas for young heroes Themes emerging from this selection include seizing the day, making history and developing survival strategies. Starr, the inspirational narrator of Angie Thomas ’s passionate and uncompromising  The Hate U Give  (Walker £7.99) has two identities as a young black woman, one of which fits more easily into life at her almost entirely white private school. Having witnessed the death of her two best friends makes Starr older than her years, and her regular teenage path of dating, basketball, studying and sleepovers is dotted with landmine-like dilemmas. Should she speak out about the latest shooting by a police officer? Should her family move to the suburbs? Can they stay true to their community and escape the worst effects of gang culture? Can her white boyfriend ever really understand her life? Starr and her many readers will keep asking the big questions. 

Film directors Sylvain Chomet and Bobbie Peers give a fantastic spin to the challenges of the tweenage years, alongside vlogging cats and talking fish Picture books for key stage 2 readers require a balance of graphics and grist – too cute and you’ll insult their sense of maturity. Dancing across the divide from picture- to text-led is Abby Hanlon’s anarchic  Dory Fantasmagory  (Faber £6.99), for the very youngest in this range. Poor Dory: nobody wants to play with a kid sister whose imagination is matched by her pestiferousness. Hanlon’s cartoons add devilment to the narrative, mostly set in Dory’s imagination. Her siblings make up a baby-stealing bogeywoman to scare her; Dory responds by darting Mrs Gobble Gracker with sedatives. Very funny. 

 The pioneering founder of a literary consultancy dedicated to helping aspiring writers Rebecca Swift, who has died aged 53 of cancer, believed that anyone who writes and wishes to be edited and advised constructively and professionally should be given that opportunity. To this end, in 1996 she founded The Literary Consultancy (TLC) with Hannah Griffiths. It was the first of its kind – a manuscript assessment agency offering detailed editorial feedback to anyone writing in English anywhere in the world. Set up in Becky’s north London flat on a capital sum of £600, TLC never borrowed another penny. From 1989 to 1995, Becky had been a junior editor at Virago Press . At that time, the “slush pile” – that mountain of unsolicited manuscripts – was one of the first casualties of the editorial department: publishers no longer had the resources to read unsolicited manuscripts, which were returned to the writer with a standard note. 

 A century after the Bloomsbury luminaries took delivery of their own printing equipment, the legacy of their pioneering – and often dramatic – DIY operation lives on “We unpacked it with enormous excitement, finally with Nelly’s help carried it into the drawing room, set it on its stand, and discovered that it was smashed in half,” wrote Virginia Woolf on the afternoon of 24 April 1917. That day she and her husband Leonard took delivery of the hand press that heralded the birth of their brainchild, the Hogarth Press. Their £19 purchase had been long awaited, one of three resolutions made while the couple took tea on Virginia’s 33rd birthday: they would buy Hogarth House in Richmond, find a hand press to do their own printing, and buy a bulldog and name him John. The missing part needed to fix the press and render it operative arrived several weeks later and the first publication notice, painstakingly hand set by the Woolfs, was sent out in May. In tidy lettering, it bravely announced the imminent publication of a pamphlet titled Two Stories: one each by Virginia and Leonard. 

The award-winning novelist on life’s transitional stages, and her father – the man who wrote Love Story Francesca Segal was born in 1980 in north-west London, where she lives today. Her debut novel,  The Innocents , won the 2012 Costa first novel award and the Betty Trask award. Her new novel,  The Awkward Age , tells a story about reconstituted families and the lengths to which parents will go to ensure their child’s happiness.  The Awkward Age is about a fifty-something couple on their second relationship, cohabiting with their two teenage children. What appealed to you about this scenario? I thought it was rich with tension and comic possibilities. It’s what more than 50% of families in this country look like. And that noble lunacy of constructing two halves that were never designed to fit together – it’s beautiful, sad, touching and intriguing. 

 Is friendship really all it’s cracked up to be, asks the US novelist And if they ever put a bullet through your brain, I’ll complain. It’s friendship, friendship, just a perfect blendship … Cole Porter  The jury’s out on friendship. It’s not the cynical and acrimonious age of Trump that brings friendship to my mind (though can you imagine our president ever, really having a friend?). It’s me. I’ve been brooding about friendship. Now and then, don’t we need to think hard about our presumed institutions? “A friend is the hope of the heart,” Emerson wrote. “A masterpiece of nature.” I’m not sure. “I sometimes wonder,” Philip Larkin wrote to his girlfriend, “if anyone can do anything for anyone.” You know something sceptical’s afoot when you find Larkin on your bedside table instead of Montaigne and La Rochefoucauld. 

 The My Beautiful Laundrette writer on Brexit Britain, collaborating with his sons and seeing his seventh novel as a B movie The afternoon I meet Hanif Kureishi seems fittingly ominous, with dark skies and swirling wind a reflection of the&nbsp;political weather. Over in Westminster, Theresa May is busy triggering Article 50, and fulfilling the will of the British people (little did we know, of course, what further turbulence was to come, with the election called this week). Meanwhile, Kureishi and I set up shop in a jolly brasserie in Shepherd’s Bush, west London, with polished wood and a chequerboard floor; he sips a glass of red, I chug an espresso and, despite the day, there is something cheerfully European about the whole scene. There’s also something about Kureishi that chimes with the mood of&nbsp;the times: laconic and deadpan in manner, he alternates between intense seriousness and comical flippancy; there’s a sort of throwaway, geezer donnishness to him. Here we are, he points out with relish, “the hated metropolitan elite”, as if it is chiefly a matter of naughtiness, of occupying the countercultural margins. But at the close of our conversation, when I ask him if there’s anything he would like to&nbsp;expand on, he becomes focused and&nbsp;exact: race, he says, is the thing he thinks and worries about the most. He refers to the Britain of his youth and early adulthood (he is now 62), which he memorably charted in early work such as My Beautiful Laundrette , Sammy and&nbsp;Rosie Get Laid and The Buddha of&nbsp;Suburbia ; the waning of the racism of&nbsp;early multiculturalism and of the emergence of London, “a new idea”. 

 The comics cult hero explains why he’s a disappointed optimist and reflects on the fresh relevance of his 90s hit Transmetropolitan in the age of Trump No matter what happens, Warren Ellis is never without his sense of humour. “You remember that bit in the last series of The Thick of It, when Malcolm Tucker orchestrates a political coup and says: ‘Thank God, I’ve been so fucking bored for the last three years?’” he says. “I have to consider the possibility that I’m just a horrible sociopath, because I’ve been so fucking bored for the last few years and now everything is insane and I’m loving it.” Despite a dauntingly long list of more recent projects – his New York Times-bestselling novel Gun Machine , writing several TV shows including Netflix’s upcoming Castlevania , and the Hollywood adaptations of his comics Iron Man: Extremis (which became the film Iron Man 3) and Red (which became the eponymous comedy starring Helen Mirren) among them – it is one of Ellis’s older works that has rocketed back into relevance. His comic Transmetropolitan , which ran from 1997 to 2002, follows journalist Spider Jerusalem, who wages war with a crooked US president, Gary “The Smile” Callahan. Equal parts sci-fi and sociopolitical commentary, Transmetropolitan is known as one of Ellis’s funniest titles – and, starting with Jerusalem’s literal descent from a mountain to try to talk revolution into an apathetic population, it is freshly topical. 

The prize-winning author on her second novel and the pressures of early success Lisa McInerney is an Irish novelist and short story writer. Her debut novel, The Glorious Heresies , won the Baileys prize for fiction and&nbsp;the Desmond Elliott prize. Her new novel, The Blood Miracles , revisits the characters from&nbsp;her debut in a story that is vivid, compelling&nbsp;and moving.  Your protagonist, Ryan, is a drug dealer&nbsp;with hidden depths: a young man&nbsp;who, in a different social context, might have had a better life.  Yes, absolutely. For me, this is my background as well. I do need to stress&nbsp;I’m a working-class writer, so I’ve met a lot of people like that: who have made one stupid turn and found&nbsp;themselves fighting the consequences for years afterwards. People who are super-smart and very talented. I’ve known people who’ve done appalling things and the person who suffered most was&nbsp;them. 

 On the 25th anniversary of her first crime novel, the Commissario Brunetti author reveals how she is responding to dark times Cultured, shrewd, honest and fit Commissario Guido Brunetti – the more-or-less-ideal man who is the hero of Donna Leon ’s hugely successful series of 26 detective novels set in Venice – begins her latest book  Earthly Remains  by faking a heart attack. Pushed beyond his limits in an interview with a high-end lawyer suspected of a crime, and who he believes his favourite junior colleague, Pucetti, is about to punch, Brunetti gasps for breath, collapses on his friend and ends up on the floor. It is a wild gesture by the&nbsp;policeman who is more often in elegantly attired control. But it is characteristic, too, in that chivalry and protectiveness – both for the lawyer’s young female victim and for his younger colleague – are the immediate cause. Brunetti, as this novel opens, can’t take any more. 

 The author on guilty time out, online distractions and getting into ‘the zone’ It’s a performance. You must never forget that. However much thinking and research come beforehand, however much editing and correction afterwards, the actual writing is performance. There is a moment when you have to do it. You have to put down the rhythms of the voice you’re searching for, you have to find the right succession of detail and event, description and dialogue. Get it wrong and no amount of fiddling will salvage the situation. So your problem, as you plan your writing day is, how can I get myself “in the zone”; how can I arrive, for however short a time, at my peak performance? An athlete has her training schedule, the date of the event stamped in her mind, the excitement of the crowded stadium to trigger her best. An actor has his script, his rehearsals and, when it matters, the glare of the lighted stage. The writer has nothing. Hence all the mad little rituals we hear about, having to use a 4H pencil, a Moleskine notebook, having to be in a particular spot, in a certain room, at exactly this time of day, drinking this kind of tea, smoking this brand of cigarette. All desperate attempts to propitiate inspiration, to have ordinariness and originality somehow intersect. 

 Whitehead’s award-winning sixth novel, The Underground Railroad, not only packs a punch, it demonstrates a new kind of creative freedom “It is a very pleasing thing to watch a writer you have enjoyed for years reach an even higher level of achievement,” wrote Colson Whitehead in the New York Times recently. “To observe him or her consolidate strengths, share with us new reserves of talent and provide the inspiration that can only come from a true artist charting hidden creative territory.” He was reviewing Lincoln in the Bardo , George Saunders’ first novel, but many of Whitehead’s fans will feel the same way this week, after  The Underground Railroad  scooped a Pulitzer prize to add to the author’s National Book Award – making this the only novel to complete that particular double since Annie Proulx’s The Shipping News , back in 1994.  Related:  The Underground Railroad by Colson Whitehead review – the brutal truth about American slavery  

The prizewinning novelist and short story writer on capturing daily rural life and&nbsp;the joy of a bad review Jon McGregor’s first novel in seven years opens with a desperate search for a 13-year-old girl, vanished on a moor in the Peak District in the depths of winter. The police scramble helicopters and divers; a search party sweeps the hillside; a press conference is called. But beginnings can be deceptive.  Reservoir 13  is not a crime novel but a meticulous, slow-burning record of the rhythms of life, death and renewal in a village over the 13 years following the visiting girl’s disappearance. Children are born, old people die, and the youngsters who befriended “Rebecca, Becky or Bex” before she vanished grow to adulthood while she remains frozen in time. “I’m sure there will be people who feel hoodwinked in some way,” McGregor admits, wryly. Turning 41 this year, he is a slight man with a bone-dry sense of humour (having been runner-up in the BBC national short story award two years running, he describes himself as “Britain’s second-best short story writer”). But though he set out to play with the expectations raised by his opening scenario – “it’s like if you have a gun on the table, it has to be fired by the third act” – the crime element “was never the point of the story for me”. The point, instead, is that after the initial crisis, normal life resumes, in all its messy particularity. 

The outspoken Palestinian lawyer and author on reaching out to the young, political change in the Middle East and his optimism about the future Raja Shehadeh is a Palestinian lawyer and the author of several acclaimed books. His latest, Where The Line Is Drawn: Crossing Boundaries in Occupied Palestine , is written through the prism of his close but problematic relationships with several Israelis. It is at once personal, political, angry, conciliatory and alive to the tensions and shared values of friendships in a divided land. He lives in Ramallah in the West Bank.  Your book features a long and sometimes troubled friendship with Henry, a Canadian Jew who lives in Israel. In some respects it symbolises the conflict between Israel and Palestine, and you are quite critical of Henry. What does he think of it? Inevitably the symbolism is there but I hate it because I have a special relationship with Henry. He hasn’t read the book yet. I’m quite sure it will mean an extension and improvement in our relationship, although you never know with Henry. He knows about the book. He gave his permission to use our correspondence. I want to spend a whole day with him discussing the book. 

The author on the trials of OJ, the art of the selfie and the mind of the octopus Born in London, Naomi Alderman studied PPE at Oxford followed by a creative writing MA at the University of East Anglia. Her award-winning first novel,  Disobedience  (2006), was followed in 2010 by  The Lessons  and in 2012 by  The Liars’ Gospel . A professor of creative writing at Bath Spa University, in 2013 Alderman was named one of Granta ’s best young British novelists. She is also a video games writer and creator, and co-created the iPhone fitness game Zombies, Run! . In 2012 Alderman was selected as a protégé by Margaret Atwood; her fourth novel,  The Power  (2016), is a dystopian work influenced by and dedicated to Atwood. The novel has been longlisted for the Baileys women’s prize for fiction 2017; the shortlist is announced tomorrow. 

 In the early hours as the US election result became apparent, the novelist was at his desk beginning his satirical novel about the president, Pussy. He’s angry, frustrated – and don’t tell him to get over it From the moment Donald Trump announced he was running for president , the flood of words about the orange-faced reality-TV star and alleged property billionaire has been incessant. And it only increased after he actually became president. But those words have been factual, or at least purport to be factual, no matter how absurd and unbelievable the Trump story has often appeared. What no one has done is write fiction about this most fictional of real-life characters. Until now. I thought he’d be shot or impeached before his inauguration 

 Celebrating 20 years since owner Valerie took over, Blue Willow Bookshop is equally split between adults and children’s books, and staffed with knowledgable booksellers who can do anything - including fixing vacuum cleaners  Interview with a Bookstore from Literary Hub is part of the Guardian Books Network    Scroll down for the staff recommendations shelf  In 1995, Valerie Koehler moved back to Houston, her hometown, from California. A few days after finding the right house, she was driving down Memorial and she remembered the bookstore on the corner, Musabelle’s Books. An idea popped into her head that she might want to run a bookstore, so she stopped in and offered to work Musabelle’s Books for free. Musabelle Naut was not one to turn down free. Within a few months, it became obvious that it was time for Musabelle to retire and sell the shop. And there Valerie was, ready to buy it. It became official in October 1996 and Blue Willow Bookshop has since celebrated 20 years. The shop has changed in some big ways over the years, but it still retains the quirky charm that apparently screams You’ve Got Mail to pretty much every new customer.  What’s your favourite section of the store? 

 Two quiet, wistful recollections of the past by a South Korean poet, for the final Translation Tuesday on the Guardian website By Lee Seong-Bok and Yea Jung Park for Translation Tuesdays by Asymptote , part of the Guardian Books Network  It’s been a pleasure bringing you weekly Translation Tuesdays at the Guardian since October 2015, but, as the cliché goes, all good things must come to an end. Today’s showcase will be our 76th and last on the Guardian website. Asymptote’s commitment to contemporary world literature remains as strong as ever: Translation Tuesdays will continue at our daily blog ; I also invite you to follow us on Facebook and Twitter and sign up for our fortnightly newsletters to get our latest updates. Hopefully, we’ll be back one day! Until then, please enjoy these two prose poems by Lee Seong-bok, courtesy of Literature Institute of Korea. Wistful for lost opportunities, they are sure to evoke personal memories. —Lee Yew Leong, Editor-in-Chief, Asymptote 

 Novelist and essayist Daniel Saldaña París reflects on the poets, murderous cartels and piano tuners found in the Mexican capital By Daniel Saldaña París and translated by Philip K Zimmerman, for The Writing Life Around the World from Electric Literature , part of the Guardian Books Network  We’ve asked our favorite international authors to write about literary communities and cultures around the globe. Their essays make up Electric Literature’s  The Writing Life Around the World  series. This month’s installment is by the Mexican writer, Daniel Saldaña París. His novel,  Among Strange Victims , was recently released in the U.S. by Coffee House Press.  ***** 

 Having once attempted to track down John Hughes and write his biography, Jason Diamond is a huge fan of teen movies. Here, the author of Searching for John Hughes curates the perfect film soundtrack By Jason Diamond for Literary Mixtapes by Electric Literature , part of the Guardian Books Network  I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about teen films, specifically the movies John Hughes made in the 1980s. I spent so much time obsessing over them that at some point in my twenties I tried to write a biography of the director, but it never panned out. I write about that in my memoir,  Searching for John Hughes , but I also write about why his films, and other films with teen protagonists — from Heathers to Dope — have always appealed to me. A big part of it is the music. A perfect example is a scene in one of my favourite movies, Over the Edge , where the main character, Carl, is lying in bed, blasting Cheap Trick’s Surrender in his headphones. It’s so simple, but to me it’s one of the best moments in any teen film I can think of. The song fits so perfectly into a moment that we all experienced in high school (and maybe even still experience as adults), just sitting around listening to music and daydreaming. 

 Seventy years on, Philippe Sands discusses the abiding relevance of If This Is a Man, and we meet the author of The Clocks in This House All Tell Different Times  Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud and Acast , and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter  On this week’s podcast we pick up two very different takes on the impact of war: Xan Brooks’s debut The Clocks in This House All Tell Different Times is a novel set in England after the first world war, while Primo Levi’s If This Is a Man is his account of surviving Auschwitz during the second world war. 

 Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud and Acast , and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter .  On this week’s podcast, we welcome two very different figures into the studio to talk about empathy: the TV executive who brought Big Brother to British screens, Peter Bazalgette, and the novelist Sara Baume. 

 Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud and Acast , and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter .  In this week’s podcast, Sian talks to short-story master George Saunders, whose debut novel, Lincoln in the Bardo , is about the death of Abraham Lincoln’s son Willie – and his afterlife in a truly bizarre limbo. Saunders considers the secrets of short-story writing and first novels. 

 In July 1958, Mildred and Richard Loving were arrested for interracial marriage, then a crime in their home state of Virginia. Life photographer Grey Villet spent a few weeks with them, two years before their case brought down the law. Here are some of his images of the heroic lovers from the book The Lovings: An Intimate Portrait 

 This week’s podcast heads abroad as we look at the longlist for this year’s Man Booker International prize and speak to longlisted author Dorthe Nors about her novel Mirror, Shoulder, Signal  Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud &amp; Acast and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter  This week’s podcast heads off around the globe as we cast our eye down the longlist for this year’s Man Booker International prize . One of the judges, Daniel Hahn, joins us in the studio to introduce the writers on the list and to explore what it tells us about publishing around the world. 

 Former president Barack Obama is to journey to the South Pacific island of Tetiaroa, once owned by Marlon Brando, to write his memoir. Here’s a look at where other famous authors found the inspiration to write 

 Catherine Heaney remembers gatecrashing her poet father’s kitchen photoshoot This picture was taken when I was six years old. The photographer, Geray Sweeney, had come to our home in Dublin to take a portrait of my father for an exhibition on Northern Irish poets. I happened to be in the kitchen with my jar of bubbles as she was setting up, and she just started shooting. Clearly nothing was going to distract me from my task. I don’t recall the occasion, but, looking at the photograph now, I have an almost physical memory of everything I’m wearing or touching. The beaded necklace was a gift from a family friend and I still have it in a jewellery box somewhere. The cardigan was knitted by my mum and was a bright, cherry red. But most of all, I remember my green bubble pipe. It made big, luxuriant bubbles – far superior to the little ones you’d get from the wands in bottles. My brother says it looks like a crack pipe. 

 While working on a novella inspired by the author of Moby-Dick, the Hungarian writer László Krasznahorkai found himself enmeshed in a web of connections stretching from Manhattan and Nantucket to London and Berlin. Following in his footsteps, the photographer Ornan Rotem charts a creative journey encompassing Melville, Malcolm Lowry and Lebbeus Woods 

 Subscribe and review: iTunes , Soundcloud , Audioboom , Mixcloud &amp; Acast and join the discussion on Facebook and Twitter  Pakistani author Mohsin Hamid joins Richard in the studio to talk about his latest novel, Exit West: the story of Saeed and Nadia, a couple who leave an unnamed city in search of a new life. Mohsin shares how he came up with the idea of doors that act as wormholes into alternative universes and locations, why he left Saeed and Nadia’s city anonymised and why the conversations around Brexit and Donald Trump have left him energised. 

 American photographer Thomas R Schiff uses a panoramic camera to capture epic pictures of libraries across the US. The Library Book, published by Aperture, features buildings across the country from the earliest institutions to modernist architecture, tracing the evolution of the library as central to American culture. It is accompanied by an exhibition at the Aperture Foundation in New York City until 20 April 

 Israel’s Amos Oz and David Grossman lead a shortlist of six with contenders from France, Norway, Denmark and Argentina 

My wartime story, Their Finest Hour and a Half, has been adapted for the big screen – seeing actors playing actors and a fake film crew being directed by a real one was surreal I’ve had two jobs in which periods of boredom were punctuated by frenetic, tension-ridden activity. One was as an A&amp;E doctor, and the other as a TV comedy producer. Clearly, it would be fatuous to compare treating a road accident victim to changing a camera shot so as not to reveal the presence of a giant pork pie (which would otherwise spoil a subsequent gag), but the ludicrous thing is that, when you’re doing it, when you’re there, the stakes seem almost as high. As George Arliss, a 1930s film star, once wrote: “When work begins in the studio, nothing that happens in the outside world is of any relative importance.”  Related:  Their Finest review – Bill Nighy, Gemma Arterton and a very British kind of magic  

 Robert Macfarlane remembers JA Baker’s The Peregrine – a fierce, ecstatic, prophetic account of one man’s obsession that has held readers in its talon-like grip for 50 years JA Baker’s The Peregrine is 50 years old, but it feels as if it were written yesterday. In the half century since its publication, this fierce little book has only tightened its talon grip on us. It reads now as uncannily prophetic: of the Anthropocene (our geological age, in which human activity is now the dominant influence on the environment), of extinction events, of dark ecology – even of virtual reality. In ancient Rome a haruspex was a person trained in a form of divination based on inspecting the entrails of sacrificed animals. Baker’s book – strewn as it is with eviscerated birds, obsessed as it is with prediction – is a text of killing and foretelling: of seeing the future in blood and guts. It has haruspicated our present, and I suspect its prescience is not yet all used up.  The story of The Peregrine ’s writing is remarkable, and has a mystery at its heart. For around a decade – from 1954 to 1964 – a myopic office worker from Essex tracked the peregrine falcons that hunted over the landscape of his county. He pursued them on bicycle and on foot, watching through binoculars as they bathed, flew, stooped and roosted. He carried Ordnance Survey maps on which he marked in ballpoint pen the locations of his sightings, with circled capital letters – P, SH, HH, BO – recording raptors by species (M is for Merlin, K is for Kestrel). He learned to predict the peregrines’ locations by means of an intelligence that began as logic and ended as instinct, and in a relationship that began as fascination and ended as obsession. 

 The commodification of sex has fascinated writers, playwrights and painters for centuries – but for all the supposed liberation of our times, have attitudes really changed that much? In the past, women whose lives included selling sex were rarely the subjects of their own histories, but were glamorous, vicious or pitiable objects in others’ accounts. One particular alluring figure turns up in the Christian story of sin, redemption and resurrection recounted in the frescoes of medieval western art. Mary Magdalene, the former prostitute, recognisable by her rippling yellow hair and red cloak, kneels at the foot of the cross, weeping. A mythical figure conflated from three different characters in the Gospels, she also turns up in the Apocrypha . Renaissance painters loved her. Their images ostensibly defend Christian notions of chaste female sanctity, but simultaneously celebrate the seductiveness of beauty. They painted her costumed as a temptress in furs and jewels, with luscious breasts exposed, and also as a repentant sinner stripped of her finery, with an animal skin thrown over her, only partly hiding her luminous nakedness. Thirty years ago, similarly inspired, I wrote my novel The Wild Girl , claiming Mary Magdalene as a prophet, the author of a fifth Gospel. 

 The authors of a book curating 270 images that Instagram censored explain why they are making them visible again Early in March 2015, artist and poet Rupi Kaur uploaded a picture to Instagram of herself in her room, wearing jogging bottoms stained with menstrual blood. Lying with her back to the camera in a nondescript bedroom, nothing about the image was strange. A few days later, Kaur found her image had been removed, so she reposted it. A few days after that, it was removed again. This time she found out why: Instagram’s moderators had deleted the picture for “violation of community standards”. Kaur responded with a rallying post on her Facebook and Tumblr accounts that was shared 11,000 times. “We will not be censored,” she wrote. Kaur’s photograph is just one of the 270 deleted images featured in Pics Or It Didn’t Happen , a contemporary art book by digital artists Arvida Byström and Molly Soda that brings the pictures Instagram have removed back into the spotlight. But the book is about much more than simply shocking us with controversial pictures; both Byström and Soda agree that some level of social media censorship is needed. “I do understand why censorship exists. I’m not ‘free the nipple’ because I don’t give a shit about that,” Soda says. “But I do think that females presenting bodies are going to be censored more – as they’re always going to be in conversation with sex – no matter what the topic of the photo is.” 

 Without us noticing, we are entering the postcapitalist era. At the heart of further change to come is information technology, new ways of working and the sharing economy. The old ways will take a long while to disappear, but it’s time to be utopian The red flags and marching songs of Syriza during the Greek crisis , plus the expectation that the banks would be nationalised, revived briefly a 20th-century dream: the forced destruction of the market from above. For much of the 20th century this was how the left conceived the first stage of an economy beyond capitalism. The force would be applied by the working class, either at the ballot box or on the barricades. The lever would be the state. The opportunity would come through frequent episodes of economic collapse. Instead over the past 25 years it has been the left’s project that has collapsed. The market destroyed the plan; individualism replaced collectivism and solidarity; the hugely expanded workforce of the world looks like a “proletariat”, but no longer thinks or behaves as it once did. 

 Habila’s account of the Boko Haram kidnappings and Islamist militancy in Nigeria is short and powerful In this brief yet powerful book, novelist Helon Habila returns to Nigeria, the country of his birth, to explore the kidnapping in April 2014 of 276 girls from a secondary school in Chibok, in the north-eastern state of Borno. Although 21 girls were released in October 2016, most were never seen again. They were taken by the brutal jihadist group Boko Haram , whose anti-education leader boasted of turning them into “slaves”. Habila grew up in a Christian family but recalls Islam as a tolerant faith, one that was not puritanical and “was able to accommodate tradition and diversity”. He offers a revealing insight into how radicalism can take hold in a country in which corruption is rife, government dysfunctional and young people alienated. Journalists are discouraged but Habila manages to get into Chibok: “The&nbsp;sadness was palpable in the hot, motionless air.” He finds parents still suffering (one was found wandering in the forest calling for his daughter) and is impressed by the bravery of the girls who were able to escape. A memorable portrait of individual resilience in a divided, strife-torn nation. • The Chibok Girls: The Boko Haram Kidnappings &amp; Islamic Militancy in&nbsp;Nigeria is published by Penguin. To order a copy for £5.10 (RRP £6) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&amp;p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&amp;p of £1.99. 

 Once a decade, Granta picks the most-promising authors under 40 in the US and UK. Here are the 21 young American writers to watch this decade  The age of anxiety: what does Granta’s list say about America?   Jesse Ball , 38,  was born in New York and has published six novels, a number of poetry and prose collections, a book of drawings and a pedagogical monograph, Notes on My Dunce Cap . Ball currently teaches at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago.  Halle Butler , 31, is a Chicago-based writer. Her first novel, Jillian , published in 2015, was called the “feelbad book of the year” by the Chicago Tribune. 

 After two years of careful consideration, Robert McCrum has reached a verdict on his selection of the 100 greatest novels written in English. Take a look at his list  Robert McCrum reflects on his choices   One in five doesn’t represent over 300 years of women in literature: a response  What is missing: readers’ alternative list  The world’s 100 greatest novels of all time (2003)   1. The Pilgrim’s Progress by John Bunyan (1678)  A story of a man in search of truth told with the simple clarity and beauty of Bunyan’s prose make this the ultimate English classic. 

 Financial meltdown, environmental disaster and even the rise of Donald Trump – neoliberalism has played its part in them all. Why has the left failed to come up with an alternative? Imagine if the people of the Soviet Union had never heard of communism. The ideology that dominates our lives has, for most of us, no name. Mention it in conversation and you’ll be rewarded with a shrug. Even if your listeners have heard the term before, they will struggle to define it. Neoliberalism: do you know what it is? Its anonymity is both a symptom and cause of its power. It has played a major role in a remarkable variety of crises: the financial meltdown of 2007‑8, the offshoring of wealth and power, of which the Panama Papers offer us merely a glimpse, the slow collapse of public health and education, resurgent child poverty, the epidemic of loneliness , the collapse of ecosystems, the rise of Donald Trump . But we respond to these crises as if they emerge in isolation, apparently unaware that they have all been either catalysed or exacerbated by the same coherent philosophy; a philosophy that has – or had – a name. What greater power can there be than to operate namelessly? 

From Don Quixote to American Pastoral, take a look at the 100 greatest novels of all time  The 100 greatest non-fiction books  The 2015 version of the 100 best novels  1. Don Quixote Miguel De Cervantes The story of the gentle knight and his servant Sancho Panza has entranced readers for centuries.  • Harold Bloom on Don Quixote – the first modern novel   2.  Pilgrim's Progress John Bunyan The one with the Slough of Despond and Vanity Fair.  • Robert McCrum's 100 best novels: The Pilgrim's Progress 

Author of the 1970s cult bestseller Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance When, in 1968, Robert Pirsig, who has died aged 88, sent a synopsis and sample of his novel Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance to 122 publishers, only one showed any interest, and James Landis, the editor who responded from William Morrow, warned him not to expect either a large advance or big sales. But within a month Pirsig set off on his Honda Super Hawk, accompanied by his young son, Chris, and friends John and Sylvia Sutherland, on the 17-day journey from Minneapolis to San Francisco that, six years, two drafts and some 700,000 words later, became the basis of an immediate bestseller. Millions of readers were drawn to this guidebook for the transition of a culture from the rebellious 1960s to the “me generation” of the 70s. George Steiner’s New Yorker review, titled Uneasy Rider, famously compared the book to Herman Melville’s sprawling masterpiece Moby-Dick ; other reviewers mentioned Thoreau, whose American transcendentalism also sought to link everyday life and the metaphysical. In a road novel in the spirit of Jack Kerouac’s On the Road , Pirsig drew on the aphoristic humour of hippy writers such as Richard Brautigan . “Metaphysics is a restaurant where they give you a 30,000-page menu and no food,” he wrote. 

 What the critics thought of CE Morgan’s The Sport of Kings, Sayeeda Warsi’s The Enemy Within and Min Kym’s Gone Critics were near-unanimous in their praise for CE Morgan’s Baileys prize shortlisted second novel – about family, race and horse-racing in Kentucky – reaching for the phrase “the great American novel” as well as for horse-racing metaphors to justify their excitement. “ The Sport of Kings is ambitious, and reading it often feels like riding a green racehorse – it’s spirited, fast and almost perfectly formed, but it is also skittish and throws you off a few times,” wrote Fiona Wilson in the Times. “No dead horse has been more thoroughly flogged than the Great American Novel, yet C E Morgan, undeterred, has coaxed the poor animal into unexpected resurrection,” agreed  Duncan White in the Sunday Telegraph . “A high literary epic of America.” In the Financial Times, Edmund Gordon  described it as “a panoramic view of race relations in America … a bleak and bitter inversion of the American dream [with prose] often ravishingly beautiful, displaying an unerring instinct for metaphor and music”. The Spectator’s Henry Jeffreys   was a rare dissenter: “Horse-breeding functions as a metaphor for how things are passed down the generations … It’s a vivid analogy, but Morgan doesn’t half lay it on thick.” However, “For all its flaws, The Sport of Kings catches the spirit of modern America: violent, divided and profoundly pessimistic.” Much more division greeted the politician Sayeeda Warsi, whose book The Enemy Within is about Muslims in Britain. A “withering polemic on the flaws in government rhetoric and policy on extremism and multiculturalism”, declared  Afua Hirsch in the Observer , anticipating that some people “will criticise her denial that violent extremism has anything to do with Muslim ideology”. One such was the Evening Standard’s Maryam Namazie : “Her apologia for Islamism is shocking … Every Islamist agenda Warsi writes about, such as gender segregation, the veil or Sharia courts, is sanitised and trivialised, while almost every organisation or personality is either misunderstood, misrepresented or merely branded ‘controversial’.” In the Telegraph, Sameer Rahim  called it “important” but “chaotically organised and repetitive … Despite these flaws, her book is vital reading.” In the Times,  Douglas Murray  took credit for the book’s title (it “comes from a piece I wrote about Warsi while she was in office”) while decrying its “rewriting of events”. “I cannot think of a recent book from a mainstream publisher that has been as replete with misrepresentation and misleading sleights of hand on almost every page,” he wrote. 
